---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  Concerning Man and Woman | De homine et muliere
engtitle: |
  Concerning Man and Woman
origtitle: |
  De homine et muliere
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/creature_dialogue_man_woman"
redirect_from: /text/concerning-man-and-woman
identifier: creature_dialogue_man_woman.md
tei: /assets/tei/creature_dialogue_man_woman.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/creature_dialogue_man_woman.pdf
textauthor: Nicolaus Pergamenus [att.]
languages: [latin]
periods: [14th_century]
textcollections: [fantastic-fables, gender-sex-sensuality]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/creature_dialogue_man_woman.jpeg
thumb: /assets/img/text/creature_dialogue_man_woman-thumb.jpeg
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Bibliothèque nationale de France, département Arsenal, RESERVE FOL-BL-911, f.99v [Public Domain]

 De homine et muliere, dial. 121. Concerning Man and Woman, the one hundred and twenty-first dialogue ﻿Homo est secundum philosophum mens incarnata, fantasma corporis, speculator vitæ, mancipium mortis, transiens viator, loci hospes, anima laboriosa, parvi temporis habitaculum. According to the philosopher, Man is the mind made flesh, a phantom of time, Mulier est secundum philosophum hominis confusio, insatiabilis bestia, continua sollicitudo, indeficiens pugna, humanum mancipium et viro continenti naufragium. Woman is the confusion of mankind, an insatiable beast, a perpetual worry, an unceasing battle, a human slave, Prout quidam vir castus et immaculatus quandoque habere voluit colloquium mulieris et familiaritatem, in qua illectus et illaqueatus sigillum castitatis quam cito amisit, attendens autem ad dulcedinem verbi illius et intuens pulchritudinem faciei ejus dissipatus est dicens: propter mulieres fracti multi sunt et vulnerati. Once, a pure and immaculate Man wanted to have a conversation and an intimate relationship with a Woman. Seduced and ensnared, he lost his mark of chastity as quickly as possible. As he paid attention to the sweetness of her words and the beauty of her face, he fell headlong into destruction, saying, “Many men have been broken and wounded because of women." Unde ait quidam: peccati forma femina est et mortis conditio. Thus it is said, “Sin and death take a feminine form.” Hieronimus: janua diaboli, via iniquitatis, scorpionis percussio nocivumque genus est femina. Similarly, Jerome wrote, “Woman is the devil’s doorway, the path of wickedness, the sting of the scorpion, and the harmful sex.” Idem: gladius igneus est species mulieris; memento, quod Thamar a fratre suo sit corrupta, memento semper, quod paradisi colonum de possessione sua ejecit mulier. He also wrote, “A woman’s appearance is a fiery sword. Remember that Tamar was corrupted by her own brother; remember always that woman expelled the inhabitant of Paradise from his own lands.” Quid fortius Samsone? quid sapientius Salomone? quid sanctius David? Who is stronger than Samson? Who is wiser than Solomon? Who is more holy than David? Omnes hi per feminas subversi sunt. All these men were subverted by women. Eccl. XXV: a muliere initium factum est peccati et per illam homines moriuntur. Ecclesiastes XXV: “The beginning of sin was made by a woman, and it is because of her that men die.” Unde antiqui ab ipsis se continuerunt, prout narrat Vegetius L. II0 de continentia Alexandri, quod, cum esset ei virgo eximiae pulchritudinis tradita, cuidam principi desponsata, summa abstinentia pepercit ei, ut nec eam adspiceret, sed ad spousüm remisit, qua remissa mulieris ac principis mentes sibi reconciliavit. For this reason, the ancients always abstained from women. For example, Vegetius tells us in his second book about the self-restraint of Alexander. When a maiden of remarkable beauty betrothed to another prince was brought before him, he restrained himself with the highest abstinence so that he did not even look at her, but returned her to her groom and reconciled them to one another. Cui simile narrat Valerius lib. IV. cap. III de Scipione dicens, quod, cum intellexisset, quod virgo eximiæ formæ cuidam nobili desponsata esset inter obsides, qui erant apud Carthaginem, postquam Carthago fuit ab ipso capta, vocatis parentibus virginis et sponso, immaculatam virginem iis tradidit et aurum, quod pro redemtione puellæ oblatum erat, virgini in dotem sive marito in munus nuptiale dedit, per quam coutinentiam et munificientiam animos illorum sibi applicuit. Valerius tells us something similar concerning Scipio in book IV chapter III. After he took Carthage, he discovered that an extremely beautiful maiden engaged to a nobleman was among the hostages of that city. Having summoned her parents, he delivered their daughter to them along with a sum of gold as her dowry or as a marriage-gift for her husband. This sum had originally been given to him for the redemption of the girl. By this act of self-restraint and generosity, he won the hearts of the Carthaginians. De mira etiam continentia Xenocratis philosophi narrat Valerius eodem cap. In the same chapter, Valerius describes the miraculous self-control of the philosopher Xenocrates. dicens, quod apud Athenas quidam juvenes promiserunt cuidam mulieri impudicæ pecuniam sibi dare, si animum philosophi posset ad luxuriam inflectere. Some young men of Athens promised money to a shameless woman if she could influence him towards decadence. Quae nocte veniens juxta eum aceubuit nec in aliquo ejus continentiam labefecit et deridentibus adolescentibus, quod animum illius flectere non potuisset, respondit, quod non ad hominem sed ad statuam perrexisset. That night, she came and laid down on the bed beside him. However, she could not undo his rectitude. To the youths, who mocked her for being unable to influence Xenocrates, she retorted that she had not gone to a man but to a statue. Vocarunt enim pbilosophum statuam propter immobilem ejus continentiam.  Indeed, they called that philosopher a statue due to his immutable self-restraint. 
 
## Introduction to the Source 
<p>Two manuscript versions of the <em>Dialogus Creaturarum</em> exist. Of these, only the so-called “short redaction” has been printed; Gerard Leeu opted for this version of the text in the first Latin edition (1480) and all the vernacular translations are based upon it. This short redaction is attested in twelve manuscripts from the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, and is thought to best reflect the original text, which was composed after 1326. This dating derives from the fact that it borrows heavily from a compilation, the <em>Libellus qui intitulatur multifarium</em>, which was compiled at Bologna in that year (see Ruelle 1985, p. 22). In contrast, the “long redaction” survives in only two manuscripts, both of which are comparatively late (in or after 1431): Toledo, Biblioteca capitular, 10-28 and Torino, Biblioteca Nazionale Universitaria, H. III. 6. In these manuscripts, the <em>Dialogus Creaturarum</em> is commonly presented under the title <em>Contemptus Sublimitatis</em> (“The Contempt of Worldly Power”), which reflects its structure as a handbook of moral examples.</p>
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>This<em> Dialogus Creaturarum</em> (“Dialogue of Creatures”), is one of eight such texts published by the <em>Global Medieval Sourcebook</em>. It was composed in the fourteenth century and its authorship remains debated, though it was historically attributed to either Nicolaus Pergamenus, about whom little is known, or Magninus Mediolanensis (also known as Mayno de Mayneriis), who was a physician. In recent years, beginning with Ruelle 1985, scholars have tended towards the conclusion that the <em>Dialogus</em> was compiled in Milan, though not necessarily by Magninus.</p> <p>The text consists of 122 dialogues largely populated by anthropomorphic “creatures”, loosely defined; sections translated for the <em>Global Medieval Sourcebook</em> feature elements (fire, water), planetary bodies (the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, a cloud), animals (the leopard and unicorn), as well as a talking topaz. Each dialogue is further divided into two sections, the first part depicting an encounter between these creatures – two is the usual number, though some dialogues have one or three – that ends in a violent conflict. This experience is summed up in a moral, typically delivered by the defeated party, which is then exemplified in the second half of the dialogue through citations from historiography, literature, and sacred scripture. Common texts cited include the pagan authors Seneca the Younger and Valerius Maximus, along with the Christian writers Paul, Augustine, and John Chrystostom and compilations such as the <em>Vitae patrum</em> (“Lives of the Fathers”) and <em>Legenda aurea</em> (“Golden Legend”).</p> <p>The great precision with which these references are cited – often including book and chapter numbers – suggests that the Dialogus was designed as a reference text containing recommendations for further reading, and more specifically as a handbook for constructing sermons (as indicated in the Preface). This purpose does not, however, detract from its entertaining style, which derives in no small part from the passionate dialogue that takes place between the creatures and the fast-paced descriptions of their battles against one another. These features explain the popularity of the <em>Dialogus</em>, which ran through numerous editions from the late fifteenth century onwards: the illustrated text compiled by Gerard Leeu was printed eight times in the eleven years from 1480 to 1491: once in French, twice in Dutch, and five times in Latin.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Cardelle de Hartman, Carmen and Estrella Pérez Rodríguez. “Las auctoritates del Contemptus Sublimitatis (Dialogus Creaturarum).” <em>Auctor et auctoritas in Latinis medii aevi litteris/Author and Authorship in Medieval Latin Literature: Proceedings of the VIth Congress of the International Medieval Latin Committee (Benevento-Naples, November 9-13, 2010)</em>, edited by Edoardo D’Angelo and Jan Ziolkowski, SISMEL - Edizioni di Galluzzo, 2014, pp. 199-212.</p> <ul> <li>Demonstrates that instead of nine manuscripts as previously thought, there instead exist 15 complete manuscripts and a fragment, and outlines these manuscripts’ relationship to one another.</li> </ul> <p>Kratzmann, Gregory C, and Elizabeth Gee, editors. <em>The Dialoges of Creatures Moralysed: A Critical Edition</em>. Brill, 1988, pp. 1-64.</p> <ul> <li>Edition of the medieval English translation first published in 1530 (original author unknown), but the Introduction contains information on the translation history and dissemination of the Latin Dialogus more generally.</li> </ul> <p>Schmitt, Jean-Claude. “Recueils franciscains d’exempla et perfectionnement des techniques intellectuelles du XIIIe au XVe siècle.” <em>Bibliothèque de l’École des chartes 135</em>, 1977, pp. 5-21.</p> <ul> <li>Discusses the front matter in early manuscripts of the Latin Dialogus, which contained both a list of titles and an alphabetical index of moral lessons to facilitate citation.</li> </ul> <p dir="ltr" id="docs-internal-guid-941dc6df-7fff-6fc1-6675-823656029460">Rajna, Pio. “Intorno al cosiddetto Dialogus creaturarum ed al suo autore.” <em>Giornale storico della letteratura italiana</em>, vol. 10, 1887, pp. 75-113.</p> <ul dir="ltr"> <li>Advances arguments for two possible authors: Nicolaus Pergamenus and the Milanese doctor Mayno de Mayneriis, with a strong preference for the letter, and summarises the style and contents of the Dialogus.</li> </ul> <p dir="ltr">Ruelle, Pierre, editor. <em>Le “Dialogue des creatures”: Traduction par Colart Mansion (1482) du “Dialogus creaturarum’’ (XIVe siècle)</em>. Classe des Lettres et des Sciences Morales et Politiques, Collections des Anciens Auteurs Belges, n.s. 8, Palais des Académies, 1985, pp. 1-80.</p> <ul dir="ltr"> <li>Annotated edition of the medieval French translation by Colart Mansion, but the Introduction outlines the manuscript tradition and authorship of the Latin Dialogus.</li> </ul>
## Credits
Based on the edition by Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, Translation by Astrid Khoo, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Irene Han
