---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  The King of Tars | Þe king of Tars
engtitle: |
  The King of Tars
origtitle: |
  Þe king of Tars
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/king_tars"
redirect_from: /text/king-tars
identifier: king_tars.md
tei: /assets/tei/king_tars.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/king_tars.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [english]
periods: [14th_century]
textcollections: [cross-cultural-encounters, gender-sex-sensuality]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/king_tars.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/king_tars-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Oxford, Bodleian Library MS. Eng. poet. a. 1 [Public Domain]

     Herkneþ to me boþe eld &amp; ȝing, Listen to me, both old and young, For Maries loue þat swete þing, For the love of Mary, that precious woman, Al hou a wer bigan About how a war began Bitvene a trewe Cristen king Between a true, Christian king &amp; an heþen heye lording, And a pagan high lord, Of Dames þe soudan. The sultan of Damascus. Þe king of Tars hadde a wiue, The King of Tars had [married] a wife, Feirer miȝt non ben oliue Of whom any man could say Þat ani wiȝt telle can. A lovelier woman had never lived. A douhter þai hadde hem bitven, Between them they bore a daughter, Non feirer woman miȝt ben, Than whom no woman might be lovelier, As white as feþer of swan. As white as the feather of a swan. Þe meiden was schast &amp; bliþe of chere, The maiden was chaste and happy in appearance, Wiþ rode red so blosme on brere, With cheeks as red as a flower on a bush, &amp; eyȝen stepe &amp; gray; And bright grey eyes; Wiþ lowe scholders &amp; white swere, With low shoulders and a white neck, Hir forto sen was gret preier To court her was the wish Of princes proud in play. Of proud and youthful princes. Þe los of hir gan spring wide The talk of her did spread about In oþer londes bi ich a side; In other countries on every side; So þe soudan herd it say. So the sultan heard it spoken. Him þouȝt his hert it brast o fiue He thought his heart would break in five pieces Bot ȝif he miȝt haue hir to wiue Unless he could have her as his wife, Þat was so feir a may. Who was so lovely a maiden. His messangers he gan calle, He did summon all his messengers, &amp; bad hem wiȝtly wenden alle And ordered them all to go quickly To hir fader, þe king; To her father, the king; &amp; seyd he wald, houso it bifalle, He said whatever it takes, he would His douhter cloþe in riche palle, Dress his daughter in royal robes &amp; spouse hir wiþ his ring. And wed her with his ring. &amp; ȝif he nold, wiþouten feyl, If he would not, then without fail, He wald hir win in batayl He would win her in battle Wiþ mani an heye lording. With many a high lord. Þe messangers forþ þai went The messengers set out To don þe soudans comandment To obey the sultan’s command Wiþouten ani duelling. Without any delay. Þan þe king of Tars þis vnderstode, Once the King of Tars learned this, Almest for wretþe he wex ner wode, He almost nearly grew mad out of anger &amp; seyd þus in sawe, And by his words said this: ‘Bi him þat dyed on þe rode, “By He who died on the cross, Ich wald arst spille min hert-blode I would sooner shed my heart’s blood In bateyl to ben yslawe. And be killed in battle. Y nold hir ȝiue a Sarazin I will never give her to a Muslim For alle þe lond þat is mine; For all the land I rule, Þe deuel him arst todrawe. Let the devil sooner hang him! Bot sche wil wiþ hir gode wille Unless, with her consent, she will Be wedded to him hirselue to spille; Be married to him and spoil herself. Hir þouȝtes nouȝt y no knawe, I ought not to know her thoughts, Ac y schal wite ar þan ȝe pas.’ “But I shall learn them before anything happens.” His douhter anon was brouȝt in plas, His daughter was brought before him at once, &amp; he axed hir biliue, And he asked her immediately: ‘Douhter, þe soudan of Damas “Daughter, the sultan of Damascus ȝernes forto se þi fas, Longs to see your face &amp; wald þe haue to wiue. And would take you as his wife. Waldestow, douhter, for tresour, Daughter, would you for his riches Forsake Ihesus our saueour, Turn back on Jesus, our saviour, Þat suffred woundes fiue?’ Who suffered five wounds?” Þe maiden answerd wiþ mild mod The maiden made humble reply Biforn hir fader þer sche stode, From where she stood before her father: ‘Nay lord, so mot y þriue. “Never, lord, so let me live! Ihesu, mi Lord in trinite, “Jesus, my Lord in trinity, Lat me neuer þat day yse Let me never see the day A tirant forto take. I marry a tyrant. O God &amp; persones þre One [Almighty] God, [who is in] three persons, For Marie loue, þi moder fre, For the love of Mary, Your queenly mother, ȝif him arst tene &amp; wrake.’ Sooner give him pain and retribution.” Þe king seyd ‘douhter, be stille. The king said: “Daughter, be at ease. Þou schalt neuer be wedded him tille, You shall never be married to him, For no bost he can make. No matter what threats he makes. Y schal him sende word oȝein I shall send him reply Þat alle his þouȝtes ben in vein, That all his advances are in vain, For þou hast him forsake.’ Because you have rejected him.” Riȝt be þe self messangers By the same messengers Þat com fro þe soudan fers, That came from the wicked sultan, Þis wordes he him sent, He [the king] sent him back these words: Þat sche leued nouȝt on his maners; That she did not believe in his principles, Sche nold nouȝt leten hir preiers And she would never cease her prayers To God omnipotent. To God omnipotent. He bad him tak anoþer thouȝt, He suggested that he reconsider, For of his douhter no tit him nouȝt Because he was not entitled to his daughter For tresore no for rent. Neither for his riches nor for purchase. Þe messangers herd him þus seyn, So the messengers heard him say, Wiþ þat word þai turned oȝain And with that word they turned back &amp; to þe soudan þai went. And returned to the sultan. As þe soudan sat at his des, They came into the hall (87) Yserued of þe first mes, As the sultan sat upon his throne, (85) Þai com into þe halle. Having eaten the morning meal. (86) Bifor þo princes prout in pres Before the battle-hardened princes Her tale to telle wiþouten les They fell down upon their knees (90) On knes þai gun doun falle. To tell their tale, without any deceit. (89) Þai seyd ‘sir, þe king of Tars They said: “Sire, the King of Tars Of wicked wordes is nouȝt scars; Is not wanting of wicked words. Heþen hounde he gan þe calle, ‘Pagan hound’ he did call you, &amp; ar he ȝiue his douhter þe t[i]lle And that before he his gives his daughter up to you Þine hert-blod he will sp[i]lle, He will shed your heart’s blood, &amp; þine barouns alle.’ And [the blood] of all your barons.” When þe soudan þis wordes herd, When the sultan heard these words, Also a wilde bore he ferd; He acted like a wild boar. His robe he rent adoun, He tore apart his robes, His here he rent of heued &amp; berd. And he pulled the hair from his head and beard. He schuld venge him wiþ his swerd, He swore on Saint [Prophet] Muhammad (102) He swore bi seyn Mahoun. That he should avenge himself with his sword. (101) Þe table so heteliche he smot He struck the table so hatefully It fel into þe flore fot-hot, That it crashed down to the floor, &amp; [he] loked as a lyoun. And [he] looked like a lion. Al þat he rauȝt he smot doun riȝt: Everything that he touched, he struck down: Seriaunt, squier, clerk &amp; kniȝt, Sergeant, squire, clerk, and knight, Boþe erl &amp; baroun. Both earl and baron. Al þus þe soudan ferd, y pliȝt, Indeed, the sultan acted thusly Al þat day &amp; alle þat niȝt; All the day and all the night; Noman miȝt him schast. Not a man could handle him. Amorwe, when it was liȝt, In the morning, when it was light, His messangers he sent ful riȝt Right away he sent his messengers For his barouns wel fast Posthaste to his barons Þat þai com to his parlement So that they meet in his war-room For to heren his iugement, To hear his plan, Boþe lest &amp; mast. Both the least and the greatest. When þe parlement was pleyner, When the council of war was assembled Þo bispac þe soudan fer, The mighty sultan spoke, &amp; seyd to hem in hast: And said to them in haste: ‘Lordinges’ he seyd ‘what to red?’ “Lords,” he said, “give me your advice. Me haþ ben don a gret misdede I have been terribly insulted Of Tars, þe Cristen king By the Christian King of Tars! Y bede him boþe lond &amp; lede I offered to him both [my] land and [my] subjects For his douhter, worþliche in wede, For his daughter, desirable in marriage, To han wed hir wiþ ring. To have married her with my ring. &amp; he me sent word ogain He has sent me reply In bateyl y schuld arst be sleyn That I should sooner be slain in battle &amp; mani an heye lording. And with many a high lord. &amp; certes he schal be forsworn - Indeed, he shall be destroyed - Wroþerhele þan was he born - Rather he was born into misfortune - Bot y þerto it bring. Than to [the destruction] I will bring. &amp; þerfore ich haue after ȝou sent, “That is why I have sent for you &amp; asembled here þis parlement, And here assembled this council of war, To wite ȝour conseyle.’ To seek your advice.” &amp; alle þai seyd wiþ gode entent They all said, in good faith, Þai were at his comandment, That they awaited his command, Certeyn, wiþouten feile. Surely, and without doubt: Riȝt bi þat day a fourtenniȝt Within fourteen days of that meeting Þai schul ben alle redi diȝt They should all be made ready Wiþ helme [&amp;] hauberk of meile. With helms [and] coats of mail. &amp; whan þai were so at his hest, When they were thus at his command, Þe soudan made a riche fest The sultan prepared a sumptuous feast For loue of his bateyle. To celebrate the campaign. Þe soudan gaderd a rout vnride The sultan mustered up a massive force Of Sarraȝins of michel pride Of Muslims in great pride Opon þe king to (to) wende. To sally against the king. Þe king of Tars herd sey þat tide, The King of Tars heard rumors of war; He gadred his ost bi ich a side, He massed his army on every side, Al þat he miȝt ofsende. All whom he could summon. Þan bigan wretþe to wake, Then they began to grow angry, For þat mariage miȝt nouȝt take So that marriage might not take away Of þat maiden hende. That gentle maiden. Of bateyl þai gun sett a day, They did prepare a day for the battle, Of seynt Eline, þe þridde in May. [The day] of Saint Helen, the third of May. No lenger no wald þai lende. They would permit no delay. Þe soudan com wiþ his pouwer, The sultan came with his forces Wiþ briȝt armour &amp; brod baner To fight upon the field, (172) Into þe feld to fiȝt, With sixty-thousand fearsome Muslims (173) Wiþ sexti þousend Sarraȝins fer, With bright armor and lofty banners, (171) Þat alle þe feldes fer &amp; ner So that all the fields near and far Wiþ helmes lemed liȝt. Gleamed with the light from their helms. Þe king of Tars com wiþ his ost, The King of Tars came with his army, Wiþ gret pride &amp; michel bost, With great pride and taunting loudly, Wiþ mani an hardi kniȝt. And with many a manly knight. &amp; aiþer ost gan oþer aseyle; Either army did close with the other; Þer miȝt men se a strong bateyle There men might see a battle Þat grimli was of siȝt. Which was gruesome to look upon. Þer hewe houndes on Cristenmen There the [pagan] hounds hacked at the Christian men &amp; feld hem doun bi niȝen &amp; ten. And cut them down [thinned their ranks] by nines and tens. So wilde þai were &amp; wode So frenzied and angry were they Þat men miȝt sen alle þe fen That men might see [lying] upon the ground Of Cristen boþe fremd &amp; ken; Christian men both stranger and family; Þe valays ren on blod. The valleys ran wet with blood. Þe soudan &amp; his folk þat stounde That moment, the sultan and his men Hewe adoun wiþ grimli wounde Repulsed with gruesome wounds Mani a frely fode. Many a valiant assault. Allas, to wele sped Mahoun. Alas! Muhammad sped to victory. Þe Cristenmen ȝede al adoun; The Christian men suffered such a defeat, Was nouȝt þat hem wiþstode. That there was no one who withstood [the enemy]. Þe king of Tars seye þat siȝt, The King of Tars saw the sight; For wretþe he was neye wode, apliȝt. Indeed, he had nearly gone mad with anger. He hent in hond a spere, He hefted a spear in his hand, &amp; to þe soudan he rode ful riȝt, And he rode hard upon the sultan. Wiþ a stroke o[f] michel miȝt He took him to the ground (186) To grounde he gan him bere. With a stroke of mighty power (185). Þer he hadde þe soudan slawe, There he would have killed the sultan, Ac ten þousend of heþen lawe But ten-thousand of the pagan faith Saued him in þat were. Saved him from that danger. Þai sett him on a ful gode stede They set him on a freshened horse Þat was so gode at eueri nede Which was so responsive to every command Þat noman miȝt him dere. hat no man could contest him. &amp; when he was opon his stede, When [the sultan] sat upon his horse, Him þouȝt he brend so spark on glede They imagined he burned like an ember on a coal For ire &amp; for envie. Out of anger and contempt. He fauȝt so he wald wede; He fought as if he was berserk; Alle þat he hit he maked blede. All that he struck, he made it bleed. ‘Help, Mahoun’ he gan crie. “Help, Muhammad!” he did shout. Mani helme þer was ofweued, There were many helms struck off, &amp; mani bacinet tocleued, Many visors sliced in half, &amp; sadles fel emtye. And saddles fallen empty. Mani swerd &amp; mani scheld Many swords and many shields &amp; mani kniȝt lay in þe feld And many knights lay [dead] on the field Of Cristen compeynie. Among the Christian army. Þe king of Tars seye him so ride; The King of Tars saw him riding thusly; He fleye, &amp; durst nouȝt abide, He fled, and dared not linger, Homward to his cite. Back home to his keep. Þe Sarraȝins folwed in þat tide, The Muslims harassed the retreat &amp; slouȝ adoun bi ich a side And struck down on every side Þat Cristen folk so fre. The noble, Christian people. Þritti þousend þer were yslawe There were slain thirty-thousand Of kniȝtes of Cristen lawe, Knights of the Christian faith, &amp; þat was gret pite. And such a shame it was! Amorwe, for her boþer sake, In the morning, for both of their benefit, Trewes þai gun bitven hem take, They did make a truce between them, A moneþ &amp; dayes þre. For one month and three days [in duration]. On a day þe king sat in his halle, One day, the king sat in his hall &amp; made grete diol wiþalle, And became utterly lost in sorrow, For his folk were forlore. For his people were hopeless. His douhter com clad in palle, His daughter came wearing robes, Adoun on knes sche gan to falle, And she did fall on her knees, &amp; seyd wiþ sikeing sore, And said with deep sighing: ‘Sir, lete me be þe soudans wiif, “Sire, let me be the sultan’s wife, &amp; rere namore cuntek no striif And cause neither calamity nor strife As haþ ben here bifore. As there has been here since. For me haþ mani man ben schent, Many a man has been slain for me; Cites nomen &amp; tounes brent. Cities [have been] captured and towns [have been] burnt. Allas, þat ich was bore. Alas, that I was ever born! Fader, y wil serue at wille “Father, I will willingly serve Þe soudan boþe loude &amp; stille, The sultan, both loud and soft [no matter the conditions], &amp; leue on God almiȝt. And trust in the almighty God. Bot it so be, he schal þe spille, Or else, he shall kill you, &amp; alle þi lond take him tille,  And take all of your land for himself, Wiþ bateyle &amp; wiþ fiȝt. In battle and with war. Certes y nil no lenger dreye Surely I will no longer bear Þat Cristen folk for me dye; A Christian people to die for me; It were a diolful siȝt.’ It is so sorrowful a sight.” Þe king of Tars answerd þo, Then the King of Tars answered, As man þat was in sorwe &amp; wo, A man who was in sorrow and woe, Vnto þat bird briȝt To that lovely lady: ‘Now douhter, blisced mot þou be “Now, daughter, may you be blessed Of Ihesu Crist in trinite By Jesus Christ in trinity Þe time þat þou were bore; From the hour that you were born. For þou wilt saue þi moder &amp; me Because you will save your mother and me, Al þi preier graunt y þe I [will] allow everything for which you have asked, Astow hast seyd bifore.’ Just as you have said before.” ‘F[a]der’ sche seyd ‘wiþouten duelling, “Father,” she said, “without delay, For Ihesus loue, heuen-king, For the love of Jesus, heaven’s king, ȝif it þi wille wore, If it were your will, Do now swiþe þat y war þere Act now, that I will be there Ar ani more sorwe arere Before any more sorrow arises, Þat ȝe be nouȝt forlore.’ So that you will not be hopeless.” Þe king of Tars, wiþ gode entent, The King of Tars, with good intent, Hastilich after his wiif he sent, Called for his wife immediately, Þat leuedi þat was so hende. The lady who was so gentle. When sche was comen in present When she had arrived in [his] presence He seyd ‘dame, our douhter haþ ment He said: “Dame, our daughter has decided To þe soudan to wende. To go over to the sultan. Do loke what rede is now at þe, See if there is any advice you have [to give], For now er here bot we þre, Since there are only us three To saue Cristen kende.’ To save the Christian people.” Þe quene answerd wiþouten feile, The queen answered without doubt: ‘Y no schal neuer þerto conseyle “No, I shall never suggest that Our douhter forto schende.’ Our daughter be put to shame.” Þe maiden was ful of sorwe &amp; wo. The maiden was full of sorrow and woe. ‘Merci’ sche crid hir moder þo “Have mercy,” she cried to her mother then Wiþ a wel reweful steuen. With such a pitiful voice. ‘Moder, it is nouȝt long ago “Mother, it was not long ago For me were slawe kniȝtes þro, That valiant knights were slain for me, Þritti þousende &amp; seuen. Thirty-thousand and seven [of them]. Forþi y wil suffre no lenger þrawe Therefore, I will no longer endure Þat Cristen folk be for me slawe, Christian men to be slain for me, Wiþ þe grace of God in heuen.’ By the grace of God in heaven.” Þus þe maiden wiþ wordes stille Thus, with gentle words the maiden Brouȝt hem boþe in better wille Led them both to better understanding Wiþ resoun riȝt &amp; euen. By her honest and impartial reasoning. &amp; when þai were þus at on, When they were agreed, Messangers þai sent anon They at once sent messengers Vnto þat riche soudan. To the wealthy sultan. To make his frende þat were his fon, To make [themselves] his friends that were his enemies, &amp; for he schuld his men nouȝt slon And so that he should not slay his men, His douhter he graunt him þan. He then gave to him his daughter. Þe messangers nold no leng abide; The messengers would no longer wait; To þe soudan þai went þat tide, They went to the sultan that moment, &amp; þus þai tel him gan. And thus they did tell him. When þo letters weren yradde Then when the letters were read Þe soudan was boþe bliþe &amp; glad, The sultan was both happy and glad, &amp; so was mani a man. And so were many men. So glad he was in al maners He was so pleased in every way that He cleped to him of his pers, He summoned to himself from his councilors Doukes, princes &amp; kinges. Dukes, princes, and kings. Into a chaumber þai went yfers Together they went into a store-room To diȝt vnto þe messangers To make ready for the messengers Gode stones &amp; riche ringes. Precious gems and expensive rings. Bi conseyl of þe lordinges alle By the council of all his lords, Þe soudan dede bring into þe halle The sultan did bring into the hall ȝiftes &amp; riche þinges, Gifts and lavish trinkets, &amp; ȝaf to hem gret plente, And gave to them a great abundance, To þe messangers wiþ hert fre, To the messengers, out of his noble heart, &amp; þonked hem her tidinges And thanked them for their news. &amp; seyd he was alle at his wille, He said he was in full agreement, Arliche &amp; late, loude &amp; stille, Whether early or late [no matter the time], loud or soft, To help him at his nede; To help him with his request; No more folk nold he spille. He would not kill any more people. Þe messangers went þe king tille The messengers went to the king &amp; told him of þat dede. And told him of that deed [the sultan’s response]. Þe king &amp; þe quene also The king and the queen as well Boþen hem was wele &amp; wo, Were both of them happy and sad, In rime also we rede. In the verses which we read. Gret ioie þai hadde, wiþouten les, They were greatly relieved, without deceit, For þat þe soudan wald haue pes Because the sultan would have peace On Cristen felawerede. With Christian fellowship. Þe first day of Iulii tide, On the first day of July, Þe soudan nold no leng abide, The sultan would no longer wait. To þe king of Tars he sent He sent to the King of Tars Kniȝtes fele &amp; michel pride Many knights of great strength &amp; riche iewels, is nouȝt to hide, And jewels too precious to keep hidden away, To ȝif to his present. To give as his bride-price. Þe messangers, wiþouten duelling, The messengers, without delay, Com to Tars, bifor þe king, Came before the King of Tars To haue his douhter gent. To receive his gentle daughter. Þai welcomed hem wiþ glad chere. They welcomed them with pleasant demeanor, Of gret pite, now may ȝe here, [But they were] deeply grieved, now you may hear, To chaumber when þai went. When they went into the bedroom. Þai maden cri &amp; michel wo They wept and grieved sorely For þai schuld her douhter forgo Because they should give up their daughter &amp; to þe soudan hir sende. And send her to the sultan. Þe maiden preyd hem boþe þo Then the maiden begged both of them Þat þai schuld bi her conseyl do That they should act on her advice To sauen Cristen kende. To save the Christian people: ‘For y wil suffre no lenger þrawe “For I will no longer endure Þat Cristen folk be for me slawe.’ Christian people to be slain for me.” To halle þai gun wende, They did return to the hall &amp; welcomed þo messangers And welcomed those messengers Þat com from þe soudan fers That came from the wicked sultan Wiþ wordes fre &amp; hende. With noble and pleasing words. Þan seyd þe quen to hem þan Then the queen said to them: ‘Hou fareþ ȝour lord, þe soudan, “How is your lord the sultan, Þat is so noble a kniȝt?’ Who is so noble a knight?” Þe messangers answere gan, The messengers did answer: ‘He farþ as wele as ani man, “He is as well as any man, &amp; is ȝour frende, apliȝt.’ And is your friend, indeed.” Þe quen seyd, wiþ milde chere, The queen said, in a humble manner: ‘Wele better þei mi douhter were, “He will be all the better because of my daughter, Bi Ihesu ful of miȝt, By Jesus [who is] full of might. Mi douhter is nouȝt to him to gode; My daughter is not too good for him, Y vouchesaue on him mi blode, On my life, I promise him, Þei sche were ten so briȝt.’ Even if she were ten times as lovely.” Þe messangers diȝt hem swiþe The messengers readied themselves immediately Wiþ kniȝtes fele &amp; stedes stiþe With many knights and hardy horses &amp; brouȝt hir into chare. And brought her into a chariot. Þe king &amp; þe quen were vnbliþe; The king and queen were so unhappy; Her sorwe couþe þai noman kiþe, To no one could they express their sorrow When þai seye hir forþ fare. When they saw her going away. [Þai seye it miȝt non oþer go; [They saw that (the chariot) might not ever return; Bitauȝten hir God for euermo They gave her up to God forevermore &amp; kist her douhter þare.] And kissed their daughter there]. Into chaumber þai went þo. Then they went into the bedroom. When þai were togider boþe to, When they two were both together, Þan wakened alle her care. Then all of their grief was loosed. Þe king was in sorwe bounde, The king was bound by his sorrow; Þe quen swoned mani a stounde, The queen fainted many times For her douhter dere. For their beloved daughter. Kniȝtes &amp; leuedis þer hem founde, The knights and ladies found them there &amp; tok hem vp hole &amp; sounde, And kept them safe and sound, &amp; comfort hem in fere. And comforted them with their company. Þus þe quen &amp; þe king Thus the queen and the king Liued in sorwe &amp; care morning; Lived in sorrow and grief, mourning; Gret diol it was to here. Such a pity it was to hear! Her care was euer aliche newe; Their grief was always renewed; Hem chaunged boþe hide &amp; hewe It changed their color and their appearance For sorwe &amp; reweli chere. Through [their] sorrow and guilt. Nov late we ben alle her morning, Not, let us leave behind all of their mourning, &amp; telle we of þat maiden ȝing And let us tell of that young maiden Þat to þe soudan is fare. Who has gone to the sultan. He com wiþ mani gret lording He came with many mighty lords For to welcome þat swete þing To welcome that precious woman When sche was brouȝt in chare. When she was brought in her chariot. He kist hir wel mani a siþe; He kissed her many times; His ioie couþe he noman kiþe, No one could comprehend his joy. Oway was alle his care. All his manners were forgotten. Into chaumber sche was ladde, She was led into her bedroom, &amp; richeliche sche was cladde And she was ornately robed As heþ(þ)en wiman were. Like pagan women are [veiled]. Whan sche was cladde in riche palle, When she was dressed in royal garments, Þe soudan dede his kniȝtes calle, The sultan did summon his knights &amp; badde þat maiden forþ fett. And ordered them to receive the maiden. &amp; when sche com into þe halle When she came into the hall Bifor þe heyȝe lordinges alle, Before all of the high lords, Toforn þe soudan þai hir sett. They seated her before the sultan. Gret diol it was for to se Such a pity it was to see Þe bird þat was so briȝt on ble The lady who was so beautiful of complexion To haue so foule a mett. To have so hideous a husband! Þei þat sche made gret solas, Although she seemed to be at ease, Þe sorwe þat at hir hert was No man could take away (396) No miȝt it noman lett. The sorrow that was on her heart. (395) &amp; whan it was comen to niȝt When nighttime had fallen, Þe leuedi, þat was so feir &amp; briȝt, The lady who was so fair and lovely To chaumber sche gan wende. Did retire herself to her bedroom. &amp; þerin anon, y ȝou pliȝt, Indeed within, I tell you truly, A riche bed þer was ydiȝt There a lavish bed was spread Vnto þat leuedi hende. For that pleasant lady. Þe leuedi was to bed ybrouȝt; The lady was brought to bed; Þe soudan wild com þerin nouȝt, The sultan would not enter into there Noiþer for fo no fre[n]de Because he would draw near the maiden for nothing, (406) For noþing wold he neyȝe þat may Neither as an enemy nor as a companion, (405) Til Þat sche leued opon his lay, Until she believed in his faith, Þat was of Cristen kende. She who was of the Christian people. Wel loþe war a Cristen man A Christian man would be loathe To wedde an heþen woman To marry a pagan woman Þat leued on fals lawe; That believed in false idols; Als loþ was þat soudan So too was the sultan loathe To wed a Cristen woman, To marry a Christian woman, As y finde in mi sawe. As I find in my story. Þe soudan ȝede to bed al prest, The sultan went right away to bed; Kniȝtes &amp; leuedis ȝede to rest, Knights and ladies lay to rest, Þe pople hem gan wiþdrawe. The people did excuse themselves. Þat miri maiden litel slepe, The admirable maiden hardly slept, Bot al niȝt wel sore sche wepe Bot al niȝt wel sore sche wepe Til þe day gan dawe. Until the dawn of day did rise. &amp; als sche fel on slepe þore There as she fell to sleep Her þouȝt þer stode hir bifore She dreamed there stood before her An hundred houndes blake, A hundred black hounds, &amp; bark on hir, lasse &amp; more. And they bayed at her unceasingly. &amp; on þer was þat greued hir sore, There was one which deeply troubled her, Oway þat wald hir take; Which would snatch her away; &amp; sche no durst him nouȝt smite She dared not to strike him For drede þat he wald hir bite, Out of fear that he would bite her, Swiche maistri he gan to make. So savagely did he act. &amp; as sche wald fram hem fle, As she would flee from them, Sche seye þer stond deuelen þre, She saw that three devils stood there, &amp; ich brent as a drake. And each smouldered like a dragon. So loþliche þai were al ywrouȝt They were all so hideously formed, &amp; ich in hond a gleiue brouȝt, And each wielded a glaive in its hand, Sche was aferd ful sore. So she was sorely afraid. On Ihesu Crist was alle hir þouȝt, All of her hope was on Jesus Christ; Þerfore þe fendes derd hir nouȝt, Therefore the fiends did not offend her, Noiþer lesse no more. Not in any way. Fro þe fendes sche passed sounde, She escaped safely from the fiends, &amp; afterward þer com an hounde And there a hound ran up behind her Wiþ browes brod &amp; hore; With wide, grey brows. Almost he hadde hir drawen adoun, He had almost dragged her down, Ac þurth Ihesus Cristes passioun But through the grace of Jesus Christ Sche was ysaued þore. She was saved from there. ȝete hir þouȝt, wiþouten lesing, Y et she believed, without deceit, Als sche lay in hir sweuening, As she lay tossing and turning, Þat selcouþe was to rede, So terrible it is to tell, Þat blac hounde hir was folweing The black hound was following her. Þurth miȝt of Ihesu, heuen-king, Then a knight in white clothing (451) Spac to hir in manhede, Spoke to her in his valor (450) In white cloþes, als a kniȝt, Through the might of Jesus, heaven’s king, (449) &amp; seyd to hir ‘mi swete wiȝt, And said to her: “My precious lady, No þarf be noþing drede, There is nothing for you to be afraid of, Of Teruagaunt no of Mahoun. [Neither] of Ternagaunt [deity ascribed to Islam] nor of Muhammad. Þi lord þat suffred passioun Your Lord who suffered crucifixion Schal help þe at þi nede.’ Shall help you in your peril.” &amp; when þe maiden was awaked, When the maiden awoke [from her dream], For drede of þat wel sore sche quaked She trembled violently out of fear For loue of her sweuening. And dread of her nightmare. On hir bed sche sat al naked, She sat disrobed on her bed, To Ihesu hir preier sche maked, And she said her prayers to Jesus Christ, Al miȝtful heuen-king. Almighty heaven’s king. As wis as he hir dere bouȝt As surely as He had dearly redeemed her, Of þat sweuening, in slepe sche þouȝt, [She believed] the nightmare that she dreamed in her sleep Schuld turn to gode ending. Should close upon a happy ending. &amp; when þe maiden risen was, When the maiden had risen [from her bed], Þe riche soudan of Damas The wealthy sultan of Damascus To his temple he gan hir bring. Did bring her to his temple. Þan seyd þe soudan to þat may, Then the sultan said to the maiden: ‘Þou most bileue opon mi lay “You must believe in my faith &amp; knele now here adoun; And now kneel down here, &amp; forsake þi fals lay And renounce your false beliefs Þat þou hast leued on mani a day, Which you have believed in for so long, &amp; anour seyn Mahoun. And worship Saint [Prophet] Muhammad. &amp; certes, bot þou wilt anon, Surely, unless you will do this soon, Þi fader y schal wiþ wer slon. You father shall be slain in battle. Bi Iouin &amp; Plotoun, By Jupiter and Pluto, &amp; bi Mahoun &amp; Teruagant And by Muhammad and Ternagaunt, Þer schal noman ben his waraunt, No man shall be his protector, Emperour, no king wiþ croun.’ [Neither any] emperor, nor crowned king.” Þe maiden answerd wiþ mild chere The maiden made humble answer To þe soudan, as ȝe may here, To the sultan, as you may hear: ‘Sir, y nil þe nouȝt greue. “Sire, I will do nothing to offend you. Teche me now &amp; lat me here Teach me now, and let me hear Hou y schal make mi preiere How I should say my prayer When ich on hem bileue. When I believe in them. To Mahoun ichil me take, I will devote myself to Muhammad &amp; Ihesu Crist, mi Lord, forsake, And give up my Lord Jesus Christ Þat made Adam &amp; Eue. Who made Adam and Eve. &amp; seþþen serue þe at wille, Thereafter will I serve you in all things, Arliche &amp; lat, loude &amp; stille, Early or late, loud or soft, Amorwe &amp; an eue.’ In the morning and at dusk.” Þan was þe soudan glad &amp; bliþe, Then the sultan was glad and happy, &amp; þanked Mahoun mani siþe And thanked Muhammad over and over Þat sche was so biknawe; Since she was converted; His ioie couþe he noman kiþe. To nobody could he express his joy He bad hir gon &amp; kis swiþe He ordered her to go and kiss at once ‘Alle þine godes on rawe.’ “All of your gods, one after the other.” Sche kist Mahoun &amp; Apolin, She kissed Muhammad and Apollo, Astirot, &amp; sir Iouin, Ishtar, and Lord Jupiter Ishtar, and Lord Jove Out of fear of his terrible threats. &amp; while sche was in þe temple [þer] While she stayed in the temple Of Teruagant &amp; Iubiter Of Ternagaunt and Jupiter, Sche lerd þe heþen lawe. She learned the pagan faith. &amp; þei sche al þe lawes couþe, Although she understood all of the tenets &amp; seyd hem openliche wiþ hir mouþe, And professed them outwardly with her mouth, Ihesu forȝat sche nouȝt. She had not forgotten Jesus. Wher þat sche was, bi norþe or souþe, Wherever she was, be it north or south [no matter the location], No minstral wiþ harp no crouþe No performer playing the harp or rote No miȝt chaunge hir þouȝt. Could ever change her conviction. Þe soudan wende niȝt &amp; day Night and day, the sultan was convinced Þat sche hadde leued opon his lay, That she had believed in his faith, Bot al he was bicouȝt. But he was none the wiser, For when sche was bi hirselue on Because when she was alone by herself, To Ihesu sche made hir mon, She said her prayer to Jesus Þat alle þis world haþ wrouȝt. Who has created the entire world. Þe soudan dede cri þat tide At that time, the sultan did announce Oueral, bi ich aside, To every corner of his kingdom A turnament to take; [That he wished] to hold a tournament; &amp; duhti men on hors to ride, [He called for] mighty men to ride out on their horses &amp; dubbed hem in þat tide, And he enfeoffed them at that time, &amp; kniȝtes gan he make. And did make them knights. Be trumpes gun forto blowe; The trumpets sounded forth; Kniȝtes priked out o rouwe Knights spurred out of dress On stedes white &amp; blake. On white and black horses. Þer miȝt men se sone &amp; swiþe Men could watch then and there Strong men her strengþe kiþe Strong men show off their strength For þat maiden sake. For the maiden’s sake. Þe Cristen maiden &amp; þe soudan The Christian maiden and the sultan In þe castel leyen þan, Remained within the castle Þe turnament to bihold. To view the tournament. &amp; þo þe turnament bigan When the tournament had begun, Þer was samned mani a man There were gathered many men Of Sarraȝins stout &amp; bold. Of Muslims strong and bold. To sen þer was a semly siȝt, There was a wonderful sight to see Of þritti þousend of helmes briȝt, Of thirty-thousand shining helmets, In gest as it is told. As it is told in the legend. Þai leyden on as þai were wroþe They contended as if they were mad Wiþ swerdes &amp; wiþ maces boþe, With both swords and with maces, Kniȝtes boþe ȝong &amp; old. Knights both young and old. Wel mani helme þer was ofweued, So many helmets were struck off, &amp; mani bacinet tocleued, Many visors split in half, &amp; kniȝtes driuen to grounde. And knights driven to the ground. Sum þer fel doun on her heued, There some fell down on their heads, &amp; sum in þe diche lay todreued, And some lay fallen in the ditch, &amp; siked sore vnsounde. And cried out, badly wounded. Þe turnament last þo, y pliȝt, Indeed, the tournament lasted this long, Fram þe morwe to þe niȝt, From dawn to dusk, Of men of michel mounde. Of men of abounding power. Amorwe þe soudan wedded þat may The next morning, the sultan married the maiden In þe maner of his lay, According to the customs of his faith, In gest as it is founde. As it is found in the legend. Atte his bridale was noble fest, At the reception was a noble feast, Riche, real, &amp; onest; Sumptuous, fit for a king, and formal; Doukes [&amp;] kinges wiþ croun. [There were] dukes [and] crowned kings. For þer was melodi wiþ þe mest There was the finest song Of harp &amp; fiþel &amp; of gest Of harps and fiddles, and legends sung To lordinges of renoun. Of celebrated heroes. Þer was ȝeuen to þe menstrels There were given to the performers Robes riche &amp; mani iuweles Royal robes and many precious gems Of erl &amp; of baroun. [Befitting] of earls and barons. Þe fest lasted fourteniȝt, The feast lasted fourteen days, Wiþ mete &amp; drink anouȝ, apliȝt, With enough of meat and drink, indeed, Plente &amp; gret fousoun. Plentiful and great in store. Þat leuedi, so feir &amp; so fre, The lady so lovely and so noble Was wiþ hir lord bot moneþes þre Was with her husband for but three months Þan he gat hir wiþ childe. Before he had made her pregnant. When it was geten sche chaunged ble; When she became pregnant, she changed in appearance. Þe soudan himself þat gan se, The sultan himself did see it; Iolif he was &amp; wilde. He was excited and joyful. Þerwhile sche was wiþ child, apliȝt, Indeed, while she was pregnant, Sche bad to Ihesu ful of miȝt She begged of Jesus, full of might, Fram schame he schuld hir schilde. That he should defend her from shame. Atte fourti woukes ende At the end of forty weeks Þe leuedi was deliuerd o[f] bende The lady was brought out of labor Þurth help of Mari milde. Through the help of mild Mary. &amp; when þe child was ybore When the child was delivered, Wel sori wimen were þerfore, The women were appalled thereby For lim no hadde it non. Because [the baby] had no limbs. Bot as a rond of flesche yschore But like a lump of butchered flesh In chaumber it lay hem bifore It lay before them in the bedroom, Wiþouten blod &amp; bon. Lacking blood and bones. For sorwe þe leuedi wald dye The lady wished to die of grief For it hadde noiþer nose no eye, Because it had not either a nose or eyes, Bot lay ded as þe ston. But lay as dead as a stone. Þe soudan com to chaumber þat tide, The sultan entered the bedroom at that moment &amp; wiþ his wiif he gan to chide And began to blame his wife Þat wo was hir bigon. For the trouble that had come of her: ‘O Dame’ he seyd biforn, “Oh dame,” he said before her, ‘Oȝain mi godes þou art forsworn, “You are cursed by my gods, Wiþ riȝt resoun y preue: I prove with rightful judgment: Þe childe þat is here of þe born The child which is born of you here Boþe lim &amp; liþ it is forlorn Is deprived of both life and limb Alle þurth þi fals bileue. All because of your false belief. Þou leuest nouȝt wele afine You do not believe truly On Iubiter no on Apoline On Jupiter or on Apollo, Amorwe na an eue; [And pray] neither in the morning nor in the evening, No in Mahoun no in Teruagant, Not to Muhammad nor to Ternagaunt. Þerfore is lorn þis litel faunt, That is why this little child is hopeless, No wonder þei me greue.’ No wonder the gods disturb me!” Þe leuedi answerd &amp; seyd þo, Then the lady answered and said, Þer sche lay in care &amp; wo, There where she lay in grief and woe: ‘Leue sir, lat be þat þouȝt. “Dear sire, let be that thought; Þe child was ȝeten bitven ous to; The child was gotten between us both. For þi bileue it farþ so Because you believe this so happens Bi him þat ous haþ wrouȝt. By He who has created us, Take now þis flesche, &amp; bere it anon Take this flesh, and bring it at once Bifor þine godes euerichon, Before every one of your gods, Þat þou no lete it nouȝt. So that you spare it nothing. &amp; pray þine godes al yfere, Pray to all of your gods together, Astow art hem leue &amp; dere, As you are loved and dear to them, To liue þat it be brouȝt. That it be brought to life. &amp; if Mahoun &amp; Iouin can “If Muhammad and Jupiter can Make it fourmed after a man Have it fashioned like a man Wiþ liif &amp; limes ariȝt, With life and healthy limbs, Bi Ihesu Crist, þat þis warld wan, By Jesus Christ who has redeemed this world, Y schal leue þe better þan I shall love you better than Þat þai ar ful of miȝt. They do, who are full of might. &amp; bot þai it to liue bring Unless they bring it to life, Y nil leuen on hem noþing For nothing will I rely on them, Noiþer bi day no niȝt.’ Neither by day nor by night.” Þe soudan toke þat flesche anon; The sultan took the flesh at once; Into his temple he gan to gon He did enter into his temple Þer his godes were diȝt. Where his gods were installed. Biforn his goddes he gan it leyn, He offered it up before his gods, &amp; held vp his honden tvein And held up both of his hands While men miȝt go fiue mile. For as much time as a man could walk five miles. ‘A miȝtful Mahoun’ he gan to seyn, “Ah, mighty Muhammad,” he began to say, ‘&amp; Teruagaunt of michel meyn, “And Ternagaunt of so much power, In ȝou was neuer no gile. There was never deceit among you. Seyn Iubiter &amp; Apolin, Saint Jupiter and Apollo, Astirot &amp; seyn Iouin, Ishtar and Lord Jupiter, Help now in þis perile.’ Help me now in this peril.” Oft he kneled &amp; oft he ros, Often he kneeled and often he stood, &amp; crid so long til he was hos; And shouted so long that he lost his voice, &amp; al he tint his while. But all of his effort he wasted. &amp; when he hadde al ypreyd, When he had finished praying &amp; alle þat euer he couþe he seyd, All that he had ever learned to say, Þe flesche lay stille as ston. The flesh lay as still as a stone. Anon he stirt vp at a breyd, Suddenly, he stood upright, &amp; in his hert he was atreyd And in his heart he was torn For lim no hadde it non. Because it [still] had no limbs. He biheld on his godes alle He looked on each of his gods &amp; seye þer miȝt no bot bifalle; And saw that there was no help to come; Wel wo was him bigon. He became despondent. ‘O sir Mahoun’ he gan to grede, “Oh sire Muhammad,” he began to groan, ‘Wil ȝe nouȝt helpe me at þis nede? “Will you not help me in this peril? Þe deuel ȝou brenne ichon.’ Let the devil burn each one of you!” He hent a staf wiþ grete hete, With profound hatred he raised a staff &amp; stirt anon his godes to bete, And started at once to beat his gods, &amp; drouȝ hem alle adoun. And to drive them all down. &amp; leyd on til he gan to swete, He lashed until he began to sweat, &amp; ȝaf hem strokes gode &amp; gret And gave them beatings hard and heavy Boþe Iouine &amp; Plotoun. Both Jupiter and Pluto. &amp; alderbest he bete afin Even harder did he pummel Iubiter &amp; Apolin, Jupiter and Apollo, &amp; brac hem arm &amp; croun. And broke their arms and crowns. &amp; Teruagaunt, þat was her broþer, On Ternagaunt which was their brother, He no lete neuer a lime wiþ oþer, He left not a limb with its opposite, No of his god Mahoun. Neither on his god Muhammad. &amp; when he hadde beten hem gode won, When he had thoroughly beaten each one of them, ȝete lay þe flesche stille so ston The flesh lay still as a stone An heye on his auter. And high upon his altar. He tok it in his hond anon, He took it in his hands at once; &amp; into chaumber he gan gon, He entered into the bedroom, &amp; seyd ‘lo, haue it here. And said: “Here, take it from me. Ich haue don al þat y can I have done all that I can do To make it fourmed after a man To make it fashioned like a man Wiþ kneleing &amp; preier. By kneeling and praying. &amp; for alle þat ichaue hem bisouȝt For all that I have propitiated them, Mine godes no may help me nouȝt, My gods cannot help me at all. Þe deuel hem sett afere.’ Let the devil set them aflame!” &amp; þan answerd þat gode wiman Then the good woman answered Wel hendeliche to þat soudan, Graciously to the sultan: ‘Leue sir, here mi speche. “Beloved sire, hear me speak. Þe best rede þat y can, [It is] the best advice that I know, Bi Ihesu Crist, þat made man, By Jesus Christ who made man. Now ichil ȝou teche. Now I will teach you myself. Now þou hast proued god þine Now that you have tested your gods, ȝif me leue to asay mine, Give me permission to challenge mine, Wheþer is better leche. [To learn] which one is the better cure. &amp; leue sir, [y] prey þe þis: And, beloved sire, [I] ask this of you: Leue on hem þat stronger is, Believe on Him that is the stronger, For doute of more wreche.’ For fear of further trouble.” Þe soudan answerd hir þore - There the sultan answered her - In hert he was agreued sore He was deeply grieved within his heart To sen þat selcouþe siȝt - To see that terrible sight - ‘Now, dame, ichil do bi þi lore, “Now lady, I myself will act according to your judgment, ȝif þat y may se bifore So that I may see before [my very eyes] Þi God is of swiche miȝt, [If] Your God is of such might Wiþ ani vertu þat he can, That with any power that he wields, Make it fourmed after a man [He can] make it fashioned like a man Wiþ liif &amp; limes ariȝt. With life and healthy limbs. Alle mi godes ichil forsake, I myself will denounce each of my gods &amp; to Ihesu, þi Lord, me take, And give myself to your Lord Jesus, As ich am gentil kniȝt.’ [On my oath] as I am an honorable knight.” Wel bliþe was þe leuedi þan Then the lady was elated For þat hir lord, þe riche soudan, Because her husband the wealthy sultan Hadde graunted hir preier. Had granted to her her request. For hope he schuld be Cristen man Hoping that he should become a Christian man, Sche þonked him þat þis world wan, She thanked Him who has redeemed this world, &amp; Mari his moder dere. And Mary His exalted mother. Now ginneþ here a miri pas, Now here begins the delightful story Hou þat child ycristned was Of how that child was christened Wiþ limes al hole &amp; fere, With whole and healthy limbs, &amp; hou þe soudan of Damas And how the sultan of Damascus Was cristned for þat ich cas, Was christened for that same reason. Now herken, &amp; ȝe may here. Now listen and you may hear. Þan seyd þe leuedi in þat stounde, Then the lady said in that instance: ‘Þou hast in þi prisoun bounde “You have shut up in your prison Mani a Cristenman. Many a Christian man. Do seche oueralle bi loft &amp; grounde, Do search it thoroughly, from top to bottom, ȝif ani Cristen prest be founde And if any Christian priest is found, Bring him bifor me þan. Bring him before me then. &amp; y schal, ar tomorwe at none Before tomorrow noon, I shall Wite what Ihesu Crist can done Demonstrate what Jesus Christ can do More þan þine maumettes can. Better than your false gods can.” Anon þe prisouns weren ysouȝt, At once the prisons were searched; Þai founden a prest &amp; forþ him brouȝt They found a priest, and brought him forward Bi hest of þat soudan. By the order of the sultan. He com bifor þat leuedi fre, He came before that noble lady &amp; gret hir feir opon his kne, And greeted her falling down on his knee, &amp; seyd wiþ sikeing sore, And said with deep sighing: ‘Madame, yblisced mot þou be “Madame, may you be blessed Of Ihesu Crist in trinite, By Jesus Christ in trinity, Þat of Mari was bore.’ Who was born of Mary.” Þe leuedi seyd ‘art[o]w a prest? The lady said, “Are you a priest? Tel me soþe ȝif þat tow best. Tell me truly, if that is what you are. Canstow of Cristen lore?’ Are you learned in Christrian doctrine?” ‘Madame’ seyd þe prest anon, “Madame,” said the priest at once, ‘In verbo Dei, ich was on “[I was ordained a priest] in the word of God Tventi winter gon &amp; more. Twenty winters ago or more. Ac Dame’ he seyd ‘bi seyn Ion, “But dame,” he said, “by Saint John, Ten winter song y masse non, I have sung no masses for ten winters, &amp; þat me likeþ ille. And I have been at pains for it. For so long it is now gon For it has gone on for so long now Ichaue ben in prisoun of ston That I have been in this prison of stone, Wiþ wrong &amp; gret vnskille.’ With great wrong and injustice.” Þe leuedi seyd ‘Lat be þi fare. The lady said, “Let that be gone from you. Þou schalt be brouȝt out of þi care, You shall be brought out of your grief &amp; tow wilt held þe stille. If you will keep yourself silent. For þurth þine help in þis stounde[s], Through your help in this instance, We schul make Cristen men of houndes. We shall make Chrsitian men of [pagan] hounds. God graunt it, ȝif it be his wille.’ God allow it, if it is His will.” Þan seyd þe soudans wiif, Then the sultan’s wife said: ‘Þou most do stille, wiþouten striif, “You must act quietly, without [causing] trouble, A wel gret priuete. And in the utmost secrecy. [Her is a child selcouþe discriif. [There is a child terrible in description. It haþ noiþer lim, no liif, It has neither life, nor limbs, No eyȝen forto se.] Nor eyes with which to see.] Hali water þou most make, You must blend holy water, &amp; þis ich flesche þou take, And take this very flesh, Al for þe loue of me. All for my own sake. &amp; cristen it, wiþouten blame, Christen it against sin In þe worþschipe of þe Faders name, In worship of the Father’s name, Þat sitt in Trinite. Who sits in trinity. For in him is mine hope, apliȝt; “Indeed, my hope is in Him; Þe Fader, þat is ful of miȝt, The Father, who is full of might, Mi sorwe schal me slake. Shall rid me of my sorrow. ȝif it were cristned ariȝt If it were properly christened, It schuld haue fourme to se bi siȝt It should have the faculties to see by sight Wiþ lim &amp; liif to wake.' And to move with life and limb.” Þat leuedi comand anon The lady ordered at once Hir maidens out of chaumber gon Her maidens to go out of the bedroom, For drede of wraying sake. Out of fear of treason. Þe prest no leng nold abide; The priest would wait no longer; A feir vessel he tok þat tide, He chose a lovely vessel at that moment &amp; hali water he gan make. And began to blend holy water. At missomer tide þat ded was don On midsummer’s day, the deed was done Þurth help of God þat sitt in trone, Through the help of God who sits enthroned, As y ȝou tel may. As I may tell you. Þe prest toke þe flesche anon, The priest took up the flesh at once &amp; cleped it þe name of Ion And called it by the name of John [the Baptist] In worþschip of þe day; In observance of the day, &amp; when þat it cristned was And just as it was christened, It hadde liif &amp; lim &amp; fas, It had life and limbs and a face, &amp; crid wiþ gret deray. And cried with great fervor. &amp; hadde hide &amp; flesche &amp; fel, It had hair and flesh and skin, &amp; alle þat euer þerto bifel, And [to him] all of this occurred, In gest as y ȝou say. In the legend as I tell you. Feirer child miȝt non be bore; A more lovely child might never be born. It no hadde neuer a lime forlore; Altogether, it was so well shaped (783) Wele schapen it was wiþalle. [As if] it had never lacked a limb before. (782). Þe prest no lenge duelled þore, The priest lingered there no longer, &amp; ȝede &amp; teld þe soudan fore But stepped out to tell the sultan Þer he was in þe halle. Where he was in the hall. Þat leuedi, þer sche lay in bed, Where the lady lay in her bed Þat richeliche was bischred That was ornately spread Wiþ gold &amp; purpel palle, With gold and purple cloths, Þe child sche toke to hir bliue, She held the child quickly to herself, &amp; þonked our Leuedi ioies fiue And thanked our Lady [Mary] with five exhortations Þe feir grace þer was bifalle. For the fair grace which had happened there. &amp; seyd ‘lord, ich pray þe, She said: “Lord I pray You, Almiȝti God in Trinite, Almighty God in trinity, So ȝiue me miȝt &amp; space To give me the strength and patience Þat y may þat day yse That I might see the day Mi lord wald ycristned be, My husband would be christened, Þe soudan of Damas.’ The sultan of Damascus.” Þan cam þe soudan, þat was blac; Then came the sultan, who[se skin] was black; Sche schewed him þe child &amp; spac,She showed him the child, and [it babbled], She showed him the child, and it babbled, Wiþ liif &amp; limes &amp; face. With life and limbs and face. Sche seyd ‘Mahoun no Apolin She said, “[Neither] Muhammad nor Apollo Is nouȝt worþ be brostle of a swin Is worth even the bristle of a pig Oȝain mi Lordes grace.’ Against the grace of my Lord.” Þe soudan seyd ‘leman min, The sultan said: “My beloved, Ywis, ich am glad afin Indeed I am wholly glad Of þis child þat y se.’ By this child that I see.” ‘ȝa, sir, bi seyn Martin, “Yes sire, by Saint Martin, ȝif þe haluendel wer þin If the half of him were yours Wel glad miȝt þou be.’ You might be rightly glad.” ‘O dame’ he seyd ‘hou is þat? “Oh dame,” he said, “What do you mean? Is it nouȝt min þat y biȝat?’ Is it not mine that I have begotten?” ‘No sir’ þan seyd sche, Then she said, “No sire, ‘Bot þou were cristned so it is Unless you are christened like [the child] is, Þou no hast no part þeron, ywis, You have not a part in him, indeed, Noiþer of þe child ne of me. Neither of the child nor of me. &amp; bot þou wilt Mahoun forsake, “Unless you will renounce Muhammad, &amp; to Ihesu, mi Lord, þe take, And give yourself to my Lord Jesus Þat þoled woundes fiue, Who suffered five wounds [&amp;] anon þou do þe Cristen make, And you make yourself a Christian at once, Þou miȝt be ferd for sorwe &amp; wrake You might be in fear of grief and pain While þat þou art oliue. So long as you are alive. &amp; ȝif þou were a Cristen man But if you were a Christian man, Boþe were þine’ sche seyd þan, Both [of us] would be yours,” she said then, ‘Þi childe &amp; eke þi wiue. “The child as well as your wife. When þou art dede þou schalt wende When you have died, your soul shall depart Into blis wiþouten ende; Into unending happiness; Þi ioie may noman kiþe.’ Then no man may comprehend your joy.” þe soudan seye wele bi siȝt The sultan saw clearly with his own eyes Þat Ihesu was of more miȝt That Jesus was of greater might Þan was his fals lawe. Than was his false belief. He seyd ‘dame, anonriȝt, He said, “Dame, right away Ichil forsake mi god, apliȝt; I myself will renounce my [gods], indeed; Þai schal be brent &amp; drawe. They shall be burnt and scattered. Ac telle me now, par charite, But for the love of God, tell me now, &amp; for þe loue þou has[t] to me, And for the love you have for me, What schal y seyn in sawe? What shall I say with my words? Now ichaue forsaken mi lay, Now that I have recanted my religion, Tel me now what is ȝour fay, Tell me now what is your faith, &amp; ichil lere wel fawe.’ And I will gladly learn it.” Þan seyd þat leuedi, hende &amp; fre, Then that kind and noble lady said: ‘Vnderstond, sir, par charite, “Understand sire, for the love of God, On Ihesu Cristes lay. The nature of Jesus Christ. Hou he was &amp; euer schal be How He was and ever shall be O God &amp; persones þre, One God in three persons, &amp; liȝt in Mari, þat may, Incarnate in the virgin Mary, &amp; in hir bodi nam flesche &amp; bl[o]d, And in her body took on flesh and blood; &amp; hou he bouȝt ous on þe rode And how He redeemed us on the cross Opon þe Gode Friday, On the Good Friday, &amp; hou his gost went to helle And how His spirit descended into hell Satanas pouste forto felle, To overthrow Satan’s dominion, &amp; brouȝt mankin oway. And ransomed humankind. Þe þridde day, in þe morning, “On the morning of the third day, To liue he ros, wiþouten lesing, He rose to life, without deceit, As he com of þe rode, After He came off the cross; &amp; ȝaf his frendes comforting, And [He] gave comfort to His friends, &amp; steye to heuen as miȝtful king And ascended into heaven as a mighty king Boþe wiþ flesche &amp; blod. In both His flesh and blood. As it is founden in holy writ According to the Holy Scriptures, On his Fader riȝt hond he sitt, He sits at the right hand of His Father, &amp; is wel mild of mode. And is mild in manner. As it is writen in þe crede As it is written in [the Apostle’s] Creed, He demeþ boþe þe quic &amp; ded, He judges the living and the dead, Þe feble &amp; eke þe gode. The sick as well as the strong. &amp; al þis warld schal todriue, “He shall scatter all this world, &amp; man arise fram ded to liue And men will rise from death to life Riȝt dome to vnderstond. To receive the proper judgement [of their sins]. Þan schal Ihesu, wiþouten striue, Then shall Jesus, without strife, Schewe his blodi woundes fiue, Reveal His five bloody wounds Þat he for ous gan fond. Which He did suffer for us. &amp; þan schal he, wiþouten mis, Then He shall, without mistake, Deme ich man after he is, Judge each man according to his character, Erl, baroun &amp; bond. [Whether] earl, or baron, or serf. Leue heron’ sche seyd þan, Believe on this,” she said then, ‘&amp; do þe make a Cristen man, “And do make yourself a Christian man. For noþing þou no wond.’ For nothing should you wait.” Þan seyd þe soudan ‘dame, be stille. Then the sultan said: “Dame, be at peace. Y schal be cristned þurth Godes wille I shall be christened according to God’s will Ar þan þe þridde day. Before the third day [from now]. Loþ me were mi soule to spille; I would be loathe to waste my soul; Preye now þe prest he com ous tille Ask the priest to present himself to us &amp; teche me Cristen lay, And teach me the Christian faith As priueliche as it may be, As secretly as it may be [done], Þat noman wite bot we þre, So that nobody knows except us three Als forþ as ȝe may. To the best that you can. &amp; ani it wist, heye or lowe, If anyone finds out, noble or peasant, Þou schalt be brent &amp; y todrawe, You shall be burnt and I hanged &amp; we forsoke our fay.' If we recant our faith.” Anon þe prest answerd þan Then at once the priest answered Hendeliche to þat soudan, Obediently to the sultan: ‘Sir, ich am redi here “Sire, I am here prepared Wiþ alle þe pouwer þat y can With all the power that I have Forto make þe Cristen man To make you a Christian man, &amp; Godes lay to lere.’ And to learn the law of God.” His hond opon his brest he leyd; He laid his hand upon his breast; ‘In verbo Dei' he swore &amp; seyd “In the word of God,” he swore and said, ‘Vnto ȝou boþe yfere, “To the both of you together, Wel trewe &amp; trusti schal y be Honest and faithful shall I be Wiþ alle þat euer falleþ to me In all that was ever entrusted to me To help wiþ mi pouwere.’ To help by my authority.” Amorwe when þe prest gan wake, In the morning, when the priest awoke, A wel feir fessel he gan take He did take a lovely vessel Wiþ water clere &amp; cold; [And filled it] with crisp, clear water; &amp; halwed it for þe soudan sake, He consecrated it for the sultan’s sake &amp; his preier he gan make And began to make his prayers To Ihesu, þat Iudas sold, To Jesus, whom Judas sold, &amp; to Marie his moder dere, And to Mary His beloved mother, Þo þat þe soudan cristned were, So that when the sultan would be christened, Þat was so stout &amp; bold, Who was so strong and bold, He schuld ȝif him miȝt &amp; space He should give him strength and patience Þurth his vertu &amp; his grace To justly rule his kingdom (912) His Cristendom wele to hold. By his virtue and his grace. (911) &amp; when it was liȝt of day When it was the light of day, Þe riche soudan, þer he lay, The wealthy sultan, from where he slept, Vp bigan to arise. Began to stir awake. To þe prest he went his way, He made his way to the priest &amp; halp him alle þat he may To help him in all that he could Þat fel to his seruise. According to his ability. &amp; when þe prest hadde þo Then when the priest had Diȝt redi þat fel þerto Made ready everything that was necessary In al maner wise, In every which way, Þe soudan, wiþ gode wille anon, The sultan, by his own will at once Dede of his cloþes euerichon Put off every thread of his clothing To reseyue his baptize. To receive his baptism. Þe Cristen prest hiȝt Cleophas; The Christian priest was named Cleophas; He cleped þe soudan of Damas He christened the sultan of Damascus After his owhen name. After his own name. His hide, þat blac &amp; loþely was, His skin, which was black and ugly, Al white bicom, þurth Godes gras, Became completely white by the grace of God, &amp; clere wiþouten blame. Clear and without blemish. &amp; when þe soudan seye þat siȝt When the sultan saw that sight, Þan leued he wele on God almiȝt; Then he believed fully on the Almighty God; His care went to game. His sorrow turned to joy. &amp; when þe prest hadde alle yseyd, When the priest had said everything &amp; haly water on him leyd, And anointed him with holy water, To chaumber þai went ysame. They went together to the bedroom. When he com þer þe leuedi lay, When he came to where the lady lay, ‘Lo, dame’ he gan to say, “Look, dame,” he began to say, ‘Certeyne, þi God is trewe.’ “Certainly, your God is true.” Þe leuedi þonked God þat day, The lady praised God that day. For ioie sche wepe wiþ eyȝen gray; For joy, she wept with her grey eyes; Vnneþe hir lord sche knewe. Unmistakably she recognized her husband. Þan wist sche wele in hir þouȝt Then she knew fully in her mind Þat on Mahoun leued he nouȝt That he believed not on Muhammad, For chaunged was his hewe. Because his skin color had changed. For þat hir lord was cristned so Because her husband was thusly christened, Oway was went al hir wo, Her sorrow was all forgotten Hir ioie gan wax al newe. And her joy rose up anew. ‘Mi lord’ sche seyd wiþ hert fre, “My husband,” she said with noble heart, ‘Sende now þis prest in priuete “Now send this priest in secrecy To mi fader þe king. To my father the king. &amp; pray him, for þe loue of me, And seek him, for the love of me, Þat he com swiþe hider to þe That he comes here to you quickly Wiþ alle þat he may bring. With all that he can carry. &amp; when mi fader is to þe come When my father has come [to meet with] you, Do cristen þi lond, alle &amp; some, Do convert every which one of your subjects, Boþe eld &amp; ȝing. Both the old and the young. &amp; he þat wil be cristned nouȝt, Whoever will not be christened, Loke to þe deþ þat he be brouȝt, See that he is put to death Wiþouten ani duelleing.’ Without any delay.” Þe soudan tok þe prest bi hond, The sultan took the priest by the hand, &amp; bad him wende &amp; nouȝt no wond And ordered him to go and not delay To þe king of Tars ful ȝare; To the King of Tars posthaste, &amp; do him al to vnderstond To do everything to make him understand Hou Ihesu Crist þurth his sond, How through the Gospel of Jesus Christ Haþ brouȝt hem out of care. They had been delivered from their sorrow. &amp; bid him bring wiþ him his ost, He requested [that the king] bring his armies with him, Priueliche, wiþouten bost, Secretly, and without show of force, For noþing he no spare. Because he would not spare anything. &amp; Cleophas wiþ gode entent, Cleophas, with good intent, To do þe soudans comandment, Started off for Tars (972) To Tars he gan fare. To obey the sultan’s command. (971) &amp; when þe prest sir Cleophas, When the priest Sir Cleophas Com to þe court þurth Godes grace Arrived at the court by the grace of God Wiþouten ani duelling, Without any delay, He teld þe king alle þat cas He told the entire story to the king: Hou þe child ded born was How the child was delivered stillborn A misforschapen þing; As a deformed creature, &amp; þurth þe preier of his wiif And through the prayers of his wife Hou God hadde sent it leme &amp; liif How God had given it limb and life In water ate cristening; [When immersed] in the water at its christening; &amp; hou þat heþen soudan And how the pagan sultan Was bicome a Cristen man Had become a Christian man Þurth þe miȝt of heuen-king. Through the might of heaven’s king. He radde þe letter þat he brouȝt, He read the letter which he brought; &amp; in þe letter he fond ywrouȝt, And in the letter he read, In gest as y ȝou say, Just as I tell you in the legend, Hou þat þe soudan him bisouȝt How the sultan requested him Tocomtohim&amp;latitnouȝt To meet with him, and not delay, Opon a certeyne day. On a specified day. &amp; bring wiþ him alle his ost [And he read] to bring with him all of his armies To take his lond bi euerich cost, To take his subjects from every corner [of the kingdom], &amp; serche in his cuntray; And search throughout his country; Who þat wold nouȝt cristned be Whoever would not be christened He schuld be honged opon a tre, Should be hanged upon a tree, Wiþouten ani delay. Without any delay. Bliþer miȝt noman ben. No man could have been happier. He cleped his barouns &amp; þe quen, He summoned his barons and the queen, &amp; told hem þus in sawe, And told them this with his words Hou þe soudan, stout &amp; kene, How the sultan, strong and brave, Was cristned wiþouten wene, Was christened without a doubt &amp; leued on Cristes lawe. And believed in the Christian faith. ‘&amp; Þerfore he haþ don sent me bi sond “Therefore, he has sent me by his messenger He wil do cristen alle his lond, That he will christen each of his subjects, ȝif þat he mit wel fawe. If any of them will eagerly accept [the baptism]. &amp; he þat wil nouȝt take cristening, And whoever will not take the christening, No be he neuer so heye lording, Even if he is his highest lord, He schal [don] hong &amp; drawe. He shall be hanged and drawn. &amp; þerfore y pray ȝou now riȝt, “Therefore I ask you at once, Erl, baroun, douk, &amp; kniȝt, Earl, baron, duke, and knight, Do alle ȝour folk bede Do order all of your men Wiþ helme on heued &amp; brini briȝt That you be made ready (1013) Þat ȝe ben alle redi diȝt With helms on heads and bright coats of mail (1012) To help me at þis nede.’ To help me at this need.” Þai sent oueral, bi ich a side, They sent throughout every corner [of the kingdom] For mani Cristen men þat tide, After many Christian men at that time, Þat duhti were of dede. Who were capable of in action. Þe king him diȝt forto wende The king prepared himself to go Wiþ sexti þousende kniȝtes hende; With sixty-thousand manly knights; Þat was a feir ferred. That was a glorious company! Þe king com wiþouten lett The king arrived without delay Þe selue day þat him was sett On the very day he was scheduled To þe soudan wel ȝare. To venture to the sultan. &amp; when þai were togider mett When they had met together, A miri greteing þer was gret They were received with a happy welcome Wiþ lordinges lasse &amp; mare. By noblemen of every rank. Þer was rewþe for to sen Sorrowful it was to see Hou þe leuedi fel on knen How the lady fell on her knees Biforn hir fader þare. Before her father there. Þer was ioie &amp; mirþe also There was joy and laughter as well To here hem speken of wele &amp; wo, To hear them speak of woe and weal, Her auentours als þai were. As well of their adventures. Þe soudan dede his barouns calle, The sultan did summon his barons, &amp; seþþen anon his kniȝtes alle, And soon he called his knights at once, &amp; after, alle his meyne. And after them, [he called] all of his train. &amp; when þai come into þe halle When they came into the hall, He seyd ‘houso it bifalle, He said: “However it occurs, ȝe mot ycristned be. You must be baptized. Miseluen, ich haue Mahoun forsake I myself have renounced Muhammad &amp; Cristendom ich haue ytake, And have accepted Christianity. &amp; certes, so mot ȝe, Indeed, so must you, &amp; hye þat wil nouȝt so anon And they that will not [be baptized] at once, Þai schul be heueded [euerichon], [Every one of them] should be beheaded, Bi him þat dyed on tre.’ By He who died on the cross.” When he hadde þus ytold, When he had thus told Mani Sarraȝin stout &amp; bold The many Muslims strong and bold Þat in his court were, Who were in his court, Mani seyd þat þai wold, Many said that they would [be baptized], &amp; mani seyd þat þai nold And many said that they would not Be cristned in non maner. Be baptized in any way. Þo þat Mahoun wald forsake He let them become Christian men, (1051) Cristen men he lete hem make, Those who would reject Muhammad, (1052) &amp; were him lef &amp; dere. And they were beloved and dear to him. &amp; he þat dede nouȝt bi his rede, And of those that did not take his advice, Anon he dede strike of his hed, He struck off their heads at once, Riȝt fast bi þe swere. Swiftly with his sword. Þe soudan had in prisoun diȝt The sultan had shut up in prison Ten þousend Cristen men, y pliȝt, Ten-thousand Christian men, indeed, Of mani vncouþe þede. Of many unknown peoples. He dede hem liuer anonriȝt, He did release them at once, &amp; þo þat were strong &amp; wiȝt And to those who were strong and able He ȝaf hem armour &amp; stede. He gave them arms and mounts. &amp; þo he seye þat miȝt nouȝt so To those he saw that were not fit, He ȝaf hem mete &amp; drink þerto, He gave them food and plenty of drink &amp; alle þat hem was nede. And everything that they needed. Þer miȝt men se wiþ þat soudan There men might see with the sultan Mani bliþe Cristen man, Many happy Christian men, In gest as-so we rede. In the legend just as we read it. When he hadde don þus þat tide, When he had done thusly at that time, Oueral his lond, bi ich a side, The rumor spread about (1071) Þe word wel wide sprong. Among all of his subjects, by every corner [of the kingdom]. (1070) Fiue heþen kinges þat tide, At that time, five pagan kings &amp; mani heþen douke vnride, And many wicked, pagan dukes Wiþ pople gret &amp; strong, With many people great and strong Þai sent about ner &amp; fer Were searching about near and far Opon þat soudan forto wer; To make war against the sultan; &amp; seyd, for þat wrong, They said, for his treachery, Bi Mahoun &amp; Teruagaunt, That by Muhammad and Ternagaunt, Þer schuld nouȝt ben his warant, No one should be his defender, Bot ben drawe &amp; hong. But [he should be] hanged and drawn. Þo fif kinges of prout parayle Those five kings of apparent valor Diȝt hem redi to þat batayle; Prepared themselves for battle, Wel stout &amp; strong þai were. So bold and strong were they. Hou þe soudan gan hem aseyle, Now listen, and you may hear (1086) &amp; what þai hete, wiþouten feile, How the sultan did confront them, (1084) Now herken &amp; ȝe may here. And [hear] how they were named, without fail: (1085). King Canadok, &amp; king Lesias, King Canadok, and King Lesias, King Carmel, &amp; king Clamadas, King Carmel, and King Clamadas, &amp; king Memarok her fere, And King Memarok their companion. Opon þe soudan wiþ wer þai went. They moved with war against the sultan; His men þai slouȝ, his tounes brent, They killed his subjects [and] they burnt his towns Wiþ strengþe &amp; gret pouwer. With strength and awesome power. Þe king of Tars &amp; þe soudan The King of Tars and the sultan Day of bateyle þai gun tan Did set a day for battle Oȝain þo kinges fiue. Against those five kings. Ac euer oȝein a Cristen man Against a single Christian man Ten heþen houndes wer þan There were more than ten pagan hounds Of Sarraȝins stout &amp; stiþe. Of Muslims strong and sturdy. Now herkneþ to me boþe eld &amp; ȝing Now listen to me, both old and young, Hou þe soudan &amp; þe king How the sultan and the king Amonges hem gun driue, Did drive among them, &amp; hou þe Sarraȝins þat day And how that day, the Muslims Opped heuedles for her pay; Hopped around headless for their audacity; Now listen &amp; ȝe may liþe. Now listen and you may hear. þe Cristen soudan þat tide, At that moment, the Christian sultan Tok a spere &amp; gan to ride Equipped a spear and began to ride To Canadok þat was kene. Upon Canadok, who was brave. &amp; Canadok wiþ gret pride, But Canadok, with great confidence, Wiþ a spere gan him abide Anticipated him with a spear To wite &amp; nouȝt at wene. To counter him, and not at distance. So hard þai driuen togider þere There they closed at arms so strongly Þat her launces boþ yfere That both of their lances [locked] together Brosten hem bitvene. And shattered between them. Þe soudan drouȝ his fauchoun gode, The sultan drew his finest falchion; Þe kinges heued wiþ alle þe hode He struck off quick and clean (1116) He strok of quite and clene. The king’s head, still within the hood. (1115) King Lesias of Tabarie King Lesias of Tiberias [a town in Judaea] To þe soudan he gan heye, Did hasten toward the sultan For Canadok his felawe; To avenge his friend Canadok; Wiþ a spere þat was trusti With a steadfast spear He rode to þe soudan wel an hey, He rode in haste upon the sultan, &amp; þouȝt him haue yslawe. Intending to have him killed. Þe king of Tars bitven hem rod, The King of Tars rode between them &amp; Lessias strok he abod, And he suffered King Lesias’s blow, As y finde in mi sawe. As I read in my story. &amp; smot him so on þe scheld But he struck [King Lesias] so hard on his shield Þat, topseyl in þe feld, hat he tumbled to the ground He made him ouerþrawe. And had unhorsed him. He lepe on hors &amp; gan to ride, He vaulted on another horse and did ride &amp; slouȝ adoun bi ich a side And strike down on every side Þat he bifor him founde. Whomever he found before him. Wham þat Lesias hit in þat tide, Whomever Lesias hit in that instance, Were he douk or prince o pride Whether he was a duke or a valiant prince, He ȝaf him dedly wounde. He dealt him a deadly wound. Þe king of Tars com wiþ a spere The King of Tars came with a spear &amp; þurth his sides he gan it bere And did drive it through his side Þat ded he fel to grounde. So that he fell dead on the ground. Þan sett þe Sarraȝins vp a cri, Then the Muslims raised up a cry, ‘A Mahoun, ful of meistri, “Ah, Muhammad, most masterful, Help ous in þis stound.’ Help us in this peril.” When king Carmel herd þat, him was wo - King Carmel was stricken when he heard that - [To fiȝt anon he was ful þro] - [He had been eager to fight at once] - A spere an hond he hent. He hefted a spear in his hand. He priked his stede &amp; dede him go; He spurred his steed and made it run; He þouȝt þe king of Tars to slo He intended to kill the King [of] Tars Er he þennes went. Before he disengaged. He smot þe king of Tars þat tide That moment, he struck the King of Tars Þurth his hauberk a wounde wide ith a deep wound through his coat of mail Þat neiȝe he hadde him schent. That nearly had him killed. Þe king out of his sadel fel, The King fell out of his saddle; Þe blod out of his wounde gan wel, The blood gushed from his wound, Þat mani men him biment. So that many men bemoaned him. For sorwe þe soudan wald wede The sultan would grow mad out of grief When he seiȝe his woundes blede; When he saw his wound bleed; He rode to him wiþ mayn. He rode to him with his lieutenants. He and þe Cristen ferred He and the Christian company Brouȝt þe king of Tars his stede, Brought the King of Tars his horse &amp; sett him vp ogayn. And sat him up again. &amp; when he was on hors brauȝt When he was brought upon his horse, Alle þat euer he arauȝt Whomever that he reached, He clef him to þe brayn. He cleaved him to the brain. King Carmel þo to him went Then King Carmel closed with him &amp; ȝaf him swiche anoþer dent And dealt him such another wound Þat ner he hadde him sleyn. That he had nearly killed him. &amp; when þe soudan þat yseiȝe When the sultan had seen that, Al wode he wex for wreþe neye. He grew utterly near mad out of anger. He rode to king Carmele. He rode upon King Carmel; He smot him on þe helme an heiȝe He stuck him high upon his helm Þat þurth þe breyn it fleiȝe So that [his falchion] sliced through his brain Þat no leche miȝt him hele. Such that no medic could heal him. King Clamadas com rideing þan Then King Clamadas came riding Wiþ a glaiue to þe soudan, Upon the sultan with a glaive, &amp; þouȝt wiþ him to dele. And intended to deal with him. &amp; smot him obouen þe scheld He struck him upon his shield Þat neiȝe he feld him in þe feld So that he nearly tumbled to the field Among þo houndes fele. To crawl among the hounds. Þe king of Tars in þat stounde At that moment, the King of Tars Hadde spite of þat heþen hounde Held hatred for that pagan hound Þat was so stout &amp; beld. Who was so strong and bold. He swore bi him þat þoled wounde, He swore by He who suffered wounds: ‘Þe dogge schal adoun to grounde “The mongrel shall fall down on the ground Þat fiȝtes þus in feld.’ Who fights thusly in the field.” He rode to him anonriȝt He rode upon him at once &amp; smot to him a strok of miȝt; And dealt to him a mighty stroke; Atvo he clef his scheld. He cleaved his shield in two. &amp; þurth his hert þe swerd gan glide, The sword pierced through his heart; Þe blod ran out bi ich a side, The blood flowed out on both sides, &amp; so he him aqueld. And so he killed him. Þan was king Memaroc in gret peyn Then King Memaroc was sorely afraid, For his four felawes were sleyn Because his four companions were slain &amp; in þe feld todreued. And driven into the field. He priked his stede opon þe pleyn He spurred his horse across the plain &amp; fleye oway wiþ miȝt &amp; mayn And fled away with ranks and train, For dred to hide his heued. Out of fear to save his head. Þe soudan seyȝe him oway ride, The sultan saw him riding away; He priked after him in þat tide, He spurred after him at that moment, For noþing he it bileued. As if he wanted for nothing else. &amp; smot him so aboue þe scheld He struck him above the shield so that Þat helme &amp; heued in þe feld The helm and the head flew across the field, Ful wiȝtlike of it weued. So forcefully was it severed. When þe Sarraȝins seyȝen alle When all of the Muslims saw Þat Memarok was to grounde yfalle That Memarok had fallen to the ground &amp; namore vp arise, And never to rise again, ‘Allas, Mahoun’ þai gan to calle, “Alas, Muhammad,” they began to shout, ‘Whi latestow Cristen hewe ous smale? “Why do you allow the Christian men to cut us down? Wicke is þi seruise.’ Your worship is in vain.” Þai fleyȝe for dred alle yfere, They all fled together out of fear &amp; dreynt hem in o riuer, And drowned themselves in a river, So sore hem gan agrise. So sorely were they afraid. Þe bateyle last swiþe long, The battle lasted so long, Til it were time of euensong, That it was until the time of the evening mass Er þai miȝt win þe prise. Before they could achieve victory. Þe Sarraȝins flowe bi ich a side; The Muslims fled on every side; Þe Cristen folk after gan ride, The Christian people did ride after them &amp; schadde hem breyn &amp; blod. And spilled their brains and blood. Þer was non þat miȝt him hide There was no one who could hide himself Þat he nas sleyn in þat tide, So that he was not slain in that instance, Wiþ fiȝt oȝeyn hem stode. Who stood against them in the fight. &amp; þo þat ȝold hem to þe pes To those that surrendered themselves Þe soudan swore, wiþouten les, The sultan swore, without deceit, Bi him þat dyed on rode, By He who died upon the cross, He þat nold nouȝt forsake his lay He who would not renounce his faith, He schuld forles(s)e þat ich day, He should forfeit that same day Þe bal vp in þe hode. The ball inside his hood [the head]. Þritti þousende þer wer take There were captured thirty-thousand Of Sarra[ȝ]ins boþe blo &amp; blac, Muslims both dark and black &amp; don in his prisoun. And shut up in his prison. &amp; he þat wald his lay forsake They who would renounce his faith, Cristenmen he lete him make He let them become Christian men Wiþ gret devocioun; With pious devotion; &amp; þai þat wald be cristned nouȝt They who would not be baptized Into a stede þai were(e)n ybrouȝt Were brought to a station A mile wiþouten þe toun, A mile outside of the town, &amp; Cristen men, wiþouten wene, And Chrisitan men, without delay, Striken of her heuedes al bidene... Struck off every one of their heads.National Library of Scotland Advocates MS 19.2.1 ff.7ra-13vb Þus þe ladi wiþ hire lore Thus the lady, with her wisdom, Brouȝte hire frendes out of sore, Brought her family out of sorrow Þorw Jhesu Cristes grace. Through the grace of Jesus Christ. Al þe while þat þei weore þare, No man could judge the depth (1241) Þe joye þat was among hem ȝare, Of the joy that was among them there (1240) No mon may telle þe space. All the while that they lived. (1239) Whon þei weore out of world i-went When they were gone out of this world Before God Omnipotent, [To be] before God omnipotent, Hem was diht a place. A place was prepared for them. Now Jhesu, þat is ful of miht Now Jesus, who is full of might, Graunt us alle, in heuenes liht Grant us all, in Heaven’s light, To seo þi swete face. AMEN. To see Your precious face. AMEN.Bodleian Library MS. Eng. poet. a. 1 fol. 307ra 
 
## Introduction to the Source 
<p><em>The King of Tars</em> s​urvives most completely in the Auchinleck manuscript, which is the chief textual witness to the poem. This manuscript originally contained forty-three separate works of literature, of which our poem is the third. This manuscript is itself an important document in the study of both late medieval manuscript production and in later Middle English linguistics. Paleographical analysis suggests that the manuscript was copied by several professional scribes, presumably by collaboration in a secular bookshop. The possession of the manuscript, and by extension its location, is unknown before at least 1740 despite the presence of names which suggest ownership. Its preeminent owner, Alexander Boswell, Lord Auchinleck, donated it to the Advocate’s Library in 1744. It is now in the possession of the National Library of Scotland, which now hosts online electronic transcriptions and scholarly information on the manuscript and its contents.</p>
## Introduction to the Text 
<p><em>The King of Tars</em> is one of the finest narrative poems written in the Middle English language, composed ca. 1330 in approximately 1,250 lines of end-rhyme verse. Its author is unknown, and the poem exists in three medieval manuscripts, the most complete of which was copied in London. It is a chivalric romance and tells a moral story through deeds of Christian valor.</p> <p>The chivalric romance genre was a product of the Crusades, and religious conflict between the fictional Christian kingdom of Tars and the real-world Islamic sultanate of Damascus is the overall theme of this text. The plot develops around the daughter of the eponymous King of Tars who, initially in a position of little political power and even less bodily autonomy, wields incredible influence over both her father and the antagonist Sultan of Damascus: by volunteering to marry the sultan, she saves her father's kingdom from destruction by the sultan’s armies which had been making war upon her father following his rejection of the sultan’s pledge of betrothal on account of the sultan’s Islamic faith. This religious conflict extends into the marriage of the daughter and the sultan: because of the sultan's strict Islamic faith, the daughter of Tars must outwardly reject her Christianity while inwardly trusting in God for her deliverance. A racial conflict is introduced when their mixed-descent child is born without a face or limbs. Unable to be saved by the sultan's prayers, the daughter of Tars has him baptized by a priest, and the child is cured by (the Christian) God. The sultan then converts to Christianity and is baptized, whereupon his skin transforms from “black” to “white.” The Damascene court is ordered to reject Islam, and those who refuse Christianity are slain. The sultan reunites with the king of Tars—now as an ally rather than a mortal enemy—and the two crusade against the sultan's lesser lords who have continued to reject Christianity, killing them all. The narrative closes with peace between the kingdoms of Tars and Damascus and a prayer to (the Christian) God.</p> <p>In terms of gender and sexuality, the daughter of Tars is a transcendent figure. Her maidenhood is central to the narrative's conflict, and her motherhood is crucial to its resolution. As a young woman, she saves the lives of her parents and their nobility, and through her self-sacrificing marriage, she saves the lives of her son and her husband the sultan. In terms of race and culture, she is a domesticating figure who prompts the transformation of a black Muslim into a white Christian, thereby acting as the medium through which the Islamic sultanate converts to Christianity. In effect, she renders docile the Oriental “other”: those cultures and religions which differ from Latin Christianity. <em>The King of Tars</em> is also a striking example of the longstanding association of whiteness with beauty, cleanliness, and purity, and of blackness with ugliness, sinfulness, and debasement. Such associations in pre-colonial times underpin current racist ideologies. Interestingly, although this text was written a continent away from its Middle Eastern setting and almost certainly by Christian author, the narrative reveals familiarity with Islamic hadith and tradition (however, it conflates Islam with the polytheism of the ancient Middle East and the paganism of the classical Roman Republic).</p> <p><em>The King of Tars</em> has become increasingly relevant in our times. Contemporary readers will identify themes of violent religious sectionalism, ethnic violence and racial purity, and the broad cultural reach of medieval literature. ​This romance ​has risen from obscurity to become a critical text for the study of medieval intersectionality, for which this translation has been mindfully prepared.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>The Auchinleck Manuscript,​ eds David Burnley and Alison Wiggins. The National Library of Scotland. 5 July 2003. Accessed 5 March 2021. Version 1.1 <a href="https://auchinleck.nls.uk/">https://auchinleck.nls.uk/</a></p> <ul> <li>Source text of ​<em>The King of Tars</em> ​and literal translation.</li> </ul> <p>Chandler, John H., editor. ​<em>The King of Tars</em>.​ Medieval Institute Publications, 2015.</p> <ul> <li>Critical text of ​<em>The King of Tars</em> ​in Middle English with modern orthography and gloss.</li> </ul> <p>Hornstein, Lillian Herlands. “The Historical Background of the King of Tars.” ​<em>Speculum</em>​, vol. 16, no. 4, 1941, pp. 404–414.</p> <ul> <li>Emphasizes ​<em>The King of Tars​</em> as evidence of “broad contacts and cultural currents of the Middle Ages.”</li> </ul> <p>Said, Edward. “Imaginative Geography and Its Representations: Orientalizing the Oriental.”<em> Essay. In Orientalism,</em> First Vintage Books ed., 49–73. Vintage Books, 1979.</p> <ul> <li>Argues how representations of the Middle East in European literature confine and recontextualize the Middle East and Middle Eastern people, with emphasis on Christianity and Islam.</li> </ul> <p>Rajabzadeh, Shokoofeh. “The Depoliticized Saracen and Muslim Erasure.” <em>​Literature Compass</em>​, vol. 16, no. 9-10, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>Emphasizes the vulgarity and offensiveness of the term “Saracen” in contemporary translation and usage.</li> </ul>
## Credits
Based on the edition by David Burnley and Alison Wiggins, Translation by Blake Hahn, Introduction by Blake Hahn, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Runqi Zhang
