---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  To the tune “Note after Note, Long Song”—"Looking and searching, looking and searching | 聲聲慢 · 尋尋覓覓
engtitle: |
  To the tune “Note after Note, Long Song”—"Looking and searching, looking and searching
origtitle: |
  聲聲慢 · 尋尋覓覓
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/li_qingzhao_looking_searching"
redirect_from: /text/tune-%E2%80%9Cnote-after-note-long-song%E2%80%9D%E2%80%94looking-and-searching-looking-and-searching
identifier: li_qingzhao_looking_searching.md
tei: /assets/tei/li_qingzhao_looking_searching.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/li_qingzhao_looking_searching.pdf
textauthor: Li Qingzhao 李清照
languages: [chinese]
periods: [12th_century]
textcollections: [good-life]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_looking_searching.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_looking_searching-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Detail from 宋朱銳春社醉歸圖(Drunk in the Trip) 卷, 朱銳, National Palace Museum, Accession Number: K2A001454N000000000PAI [Public Domain]

 聲聲慢 To the tune “Note after Note, Long Song” 尋尋覓覓， Looking and searching, looking and searching, 冷冷清清， cold and quiet, cold and quiet, 淒淒慘慘戚戚。 lonesome, dismayed, and desolate; lonesome, dismayed, and desolate. 乍暖還寒時候， At the time when it has just turned warm yet is still quite cold, 最難將息。 it is the hardest for one to rest. 三杯兩盞淡酒， How can two or three cups of weak wine 怎敵他、 shield one from 晚來風急。 the harsh wind in the evening? 雁過也， The wild geese have flown past; 正傷心， what truly pains the heart, 卻是舊時相識。 is that I knew them from the past. 滿地黃花堆積。 Yellow flowers pile all over the ground, 憔悴損， withered and wilted. 如今有誰堪摘。 Now who would pluck them? 守著窗兒， I guard the window; 獨自怎生得黑。 how do I endure this darkness by myself? 梧桐更兼細雨， The parasol tree in the slight rain 到黃昏、 at dusk, 點點滴滴。 dripping and drizzling, dripping and drizzling. 這次第， In such circumstances, 怎一個愁字了得。 how could the single word “sorrow” suffice? 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>This <em>ci </em>uses repetition to evoke the relentlessness of the speaker's sorrow, for which language is insufficient (see the final line). The political trauma of the end of the Northern Song dynasty--which forced Li Qingzhao's own migration to the south--seems intertwined with the speaker's personal doubts, one amplifying the other to yield a bleak picture where the only certainty is suffering.</p> <p>The <em>ci</em> genre of Chinese poetry first emerged in the Sui dynasty (581-619), was further developed in the Tang dynasty (618-907) and matured in the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). <em>Ci</em> is usually translated into English as "song lyrics". This is because <em>ci</em> were composed by poets to fit pre-existing tunes. The number of lines, the line lengths, and the tonal and rhythmic patterns of <em>ci</em> vary with the tunes, which number in the hundreds. One common occasion for composing <em>ci</em> would be a banquet: song lyrics would be scribbled down by guests and then sung by musical performers as entertainment. Other occasions for composing and enjoying <em>ci</em> would be more casual: the poet might sing the lyrics to himself at home or while travelling (many <em>ci</em> poets were civil servants of the Imperial Court and often had to travel great distances to carry out their work). Sometimes the lyrics would be sung by ordinary people in the same way as folk songs. This oral and musical quality sets it apart from other genres of poetry in China during the same period, which were largely written texts with more elevated objectives. There are two main types of <em>ci</em>: <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") and <em>háofàng</em> (豪放, "bold"). The <em>wǎnyuē</em> subgenre primarily focuses on emotion and many of its lyrics are about courtship and love, while the<em> háofàng</em> subgenre often deals with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service.</p> <p>Li Qingzhao was probably one of the most prominent female poets in Imperial China. Born into an elite family of imperial bureaucrats, Li Qingzhao aspired to become a writer even though literature was considered a male domain. She quickly gained fame for her poetic talent and became not only a celebrated composer of ci but also an important critic of the genre. In her view, the male poets composing lyrics for female singers struggled to convey these women’s thoughts and voices convincingly. In her song lyrics, Li Qingzhao offers the modern reader something rare and precious: the inner world of women in medieval China, as imagined by a woman poet. Her songs are often considered to be among the most affecting of the genre.</p> <p>In 1127, when Li Qingzhao was in her forties, the capital city of the Song dynasty (present-day Kaifeng)—the city where Li Qingzhao lived—was conquered by the Jin dynasty in the Jin-Song Wars, along with the northern half of the Song dynasty’s territory. The surviving members of the dynasty consolidated their regime in the south, establishing a new capital city, first in Nanjing, then in Lin’an (present-day Hangzhou). The conquest of Kaifeng marked the end of the Northern Song dynasty and the beginning of the Southern Song dynasty: two distinct eras in the political history of China, and two distinctive periods in Li Qingzhao’s own poetry. Following the invasion of Kaifeng, she moved first to Nanjing and then to Lin’an, where she spent the remaining decades of her life; her husband died in 1129. In contrast to the love themes of her earlier ci, much of her later poetry is concerned with the sorrow of her forced migration and her personal loneliness in her new surroundings.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Chang, Kang-i Sun. <em>The Evolution of Tz’u Poetry: from Late Tang to Northern Sung</em>. Princeton UP, 1980.</p> <ul> <li>A standard survey of the early history of Chinese song lyrics (romanized as both ci and tz’u).</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. “The Song Lyric.” <em>The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature</em>, vol. 1, edited by Stephen Owen, Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 434-452.</p> <ul> <li>An overview of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. <em>The Works of Li Qingzhao</em>. De Gruyter, 2019, pp. 94-198.</p> <ul> <li>A bilingual edition, with Chinese and English translations on facing pages.</li> </ul> <p>Owen, Stephen. <em>Just a Song: Chinese Lyrics from the Eleventh and Early Twelfth Centuries</em>. Asia Center, Harvard UP, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>A recent new history of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋, editor. <em>Quan Song Ci 全宋詞</em>. Zhonghua shu ju, 1965. 5 vols.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive edition of ci from the Song dynasty and the source text for the ci in this collection (introductions and annotations are in Chinese).</li> </ul>
## Credits
Text based on Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋 (ed.). Quan Song Ci 全宋詞. Vol 2. Beijing: Zhonghua shu ju, 1965, 936., Translation by Qian Jia, Notes by Nina Du,  and Runqi Zhang, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Runqi Zhang
