---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  To the tune “Vile Charmer, Long Version”—"Who planted the banana trees in front of the window | 添字醜奴兒 · 窗前誰種芭蕉樹
engtitle: |
  To the tune “Vile Charmer, Long Version”—"Who planted the banana trees in front of the window
origtitle: |
  添字醜奴兒 · 窗前誰種芭蕉樹
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees"
redirect_from: /text/tune-%E2%80%9Cvile-charmer-long-version%E2%80%9D%E2%80%94who-planted-banana-trees-front-window
identifier: li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees.md
tei: /assets/tei/li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees.pdf
textauthor: Li Qingzhao 李清照
languages: [chinese]
periods: [12th_century]
textcollections: [love-lust-longing, love-songs]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_who_planted_banana_trees-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Detail from 明文徵明蕉陰仕女圖(Banana Tree) 軸, 文徵明, National Palace Museum, Accession Number: K2A001339N000000000PAA [Public Domian]

 添字醜奴兒 To the tune “Vile Charmer, Long Version”&#8212;"Who Planted" 窗前誰種芭蕉樹， Who planted the banana trees in front of the window? 陰滿中庭。 The shade fills up the courtyard. 陰滿中庭。 The shade fills up the courtyard. 葉葉心心 One leaf after another, one heart after another, 舒捲有餘情。 folding and unfolding, with too much feeling. 傷心枕上三更雨， Heartbroken on the pillow, the rain in the third hourThe third hour of the traditional Chinese clock refers to the period between 11pm and 1am. 點滴霖霪。 drips on and on, 點滴霖霪。 drips on and on. 愁損北人， It saddens the northernerThe poet-speaker refers to herself here., 不慣起來聽。 who is not used to listening and thus rises from her bed. 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>In this <em>ci</em>, Li Qingzhao employs the image of banana trees to obliquely convey the speaker's state of mind. In the first stanza, she considers their visual impact: how the trees block the sunlight; the way their leaves resemble hearts. The speaker's own heartbreak is signalled at the start of the second stanza, in which the poet evokes the sound of rain dripping from the banana leaves and the discontent that it provokes. The characterization of the speaker as a "northerner" suggests that this ci may be conveying the poet's own feelings: she was forced to move to the south following the conquest of Kaifeng and the collapse of the Northern Song dynasty.</p> <p>The <em>ci</em> genre of Chinese poetry first emerged in the Sui dynasty (581-619), was further developed in the Tang dynasty (618-907) and matured in the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). <em>Ci</em> is usually translated into English as "song lyrics". This is because <em>ci</em> were composed by poets to fit pre-existing tunes. The number of lines, the line lengths, and the tonal and rhythmic patterns of <em>ci</em> vary with the tunes, which number in the hundreds. One common occasion for composing <em>ci</em> would be a banquet: song lyrics would be scribbled down by guests and then sung by musical performers as entertainment. Other occasions for composing and enjoying <em>ci</em> would be more casual: the poet might sing the lyrics to himself at home or while travelling (many <em>ci</em> poets were civil servants of the Imperial Court and often had to travel great distances to carry out their work). Sometimes the lyrics would be sung by ordinary people in the same way as folk songs. This oral and musical quality sets it apart from other genres of poetry in China during the same period, which were largely written texts with more elevated objectives. There are two main types of <em>ci</em>: <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") and <em>háofàng</em> (豪放, "bold"). The <em>wǎnyuē</em> subgenre primarily focuses on emotion and many of its lyrics are about courtship and love, while the<em> háofàng</em> subgenre often deals with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service.</p> <p>Li Qingzhao was probably one of the most prominent female poets in Imperial China. Born into an elite family of imperial bureaucrats, Li Qingzhao aspired to become a writer even though literature was considered a male domain. She quickly gained fame for her poetic talent and became not only a celebrated composer of ci but also an important critic of the genre. In her view, the male poets composing lyrics for female singers struggled to convey these women’s thoughts and voices convincingly. In her song lyrics, Li Qingzhao offers the modern reader something rare and precious: the inner world of women in medieval China, as imagined by a woman poet. Her songs are often considered to be among the most affecting of the genre.</p> <p>In 1127, when Li Qingzhao was in her forties, the capital city of the Song dynasty (present-day Kaifeng)—the city where Li Qingzhao lived—was conquered by the Jin dynasty in the Jin-Song Wars, along with the northern half of the Song dynasty’s territory. The surviving members of the dynasty consolidated their regime in the south, establishing a new capital city, first in Nanjing, then in Lin’an (present-day Hangzhou). The conquest of Kaifeng marked the end of the Northern Song dynasty and the beginning of the Southern Song dynasty: two distinct eras in the political history of China, and two distinctive periods in Li Qingzhao’s own poetry. Following the invasion of Kaifeng, she moved first to Nanjing and then to Lin’an, where she spent the remaining decades of her life; her husband died in 1129. In contrast to the love themes of her earlier ci, much of her later poetry is concerned with the sorrow of her forced migration and her personal loneliness in her new surroundings.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Chang, Kang-i Sun. <em>The Evolution of Tz’u Poetry: from Late Tang to Northern Sung</em>. Princeton UP, 1980.</p> <ul> <li>A standard survey of the early history of Chinese song lyrics (romanized as both ci and tz’u).</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. “The Song Lyric.” <em>The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature</em>, vol. 1, edited by Stephen Owen, Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 434-452.</p> <ul> <li>An overview of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. <em>The Works of Li Qingzhao</em>. De Gruyter, 2019, pp. 94-198.</p> <ul> <li>A bilingual edition, with Chinese and English translations on facing pages.</li> </ul> <p>Owen, Stephen. <em>Just a Song: Chinese Lyrics from the Eleventh and Early Twelfth Centuries</em>. Asia Center, Harvard UP, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>A recent new history of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋, editor. <em>Quan Song Ci 全宋詞</em>. Zhonghua shu ju, 1965. 5 vols.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive edition of ci from the Song dynasty and the source text for the ci in this collection (introductions and annotations are in Chinese).</li> </ul>
## Credits
Text based on Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋 (ed.). Quan Song Ci 全宋詞. Vol 2. Beijing: Zhonghua shu ju, 1965, 930., Translation by Qian Jia, Notes by Nina Du,  and Runqi Zhang, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Runqi Zhang
