---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  To the tune “A Single Cutting of Plum Blossom”—“The red lotus fragrance still lingered” | 一剪梅 · 紅藕香殘玉簟秋
engtitle: |
  To the tune “A Single Cutting of Plum Blossom”—“The red lotus fragrance still lingered”
origtitle: |
  一剪梅 · 紅藕香殘玉簟秋
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/li_qingzhao_red_lotus"
redirect_from: /text/tune-%E2%80%9C-single-cutting-plum-blossom%E2%80%9D%E2%80%94%E2%80%9C-red-lotus-fragrance-still-lingered%E2%80%9D
identifier: li_qingzhao_red_lotus.md
tei: /assets/tei/li_qingzhao_red_lotus.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/li_qingzhao_red_lotus.pdf
textauthor: Li Qingzhao 李清照
languages: [chinese]
periods: [12th_century]
textcollections: [love-lust-longing, love-songs]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_red_lotus.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/li_qingzhao_red_lotus-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Detail from 宋徽宗池塘秋晚圖 (Lotus)卷, 赵佶, National Palace Museum, Accession Number: K2A000986N000000000PAD [Public Domain]

   紅藕香殘玉簟秋。 The red lotus fragrance still lingered on the jade-like mat in autumn. 輕解羅裳， I gently untied my silk gown, 獨上蘭舟。 and boarded the thoroughwort boatThoroughwort is a flowering plant in the aster family. The “thoroughwort boat” may not indicate that the boat itself contains thoroughworts, as there is a tradition in Chinese literature of using fragrant plants to signify a person's moral integrity. This tradition originates from the Songs of Chu, which is generally dated to as early as the second or third century BCE.. 雲中誰寄錦書來， Who would send the brocade letter"Brocade letter" implies a love letter. from the clouds? 雁字回時， When the wild geese return in the form of the character “one”Wild geese usually form a flock in the shape of the Chinese character “ren” 人 (meaning "people"), or “yi” 一 (meaning "one") while flying.,  月滿西樓。 moonlight will fill up the western tower. 花自飄零水自流。 The flower withers alone and the water flows on its own, 一種相思， the same kind of yearning, 兩處閒愁。 pointless sorrow in two locations. 此情無計可消除， There is no way of dispelling this feeling; 才下眉頭， as soon as it steps down from the eyebrows, 卻上心頭。 it mounts to the heart. 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>It is believed that Li Qingzhao wrote this <em>ci</em> during a period of separation from her husband due to his work, and that it expresses her personal heartache over his absence. As in her other compositions, the poet employs images from the natural world (a withering flower, flowing water) to express the dynamics of human interactions.</p> <p>The <em>ci</em> genre of Chinese poetry first emerged in the Sui dynasty (581-619), was further developed in the Tang dynasty (618-907) and matured in the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). <em>Ci</em> is usually translated into English as “song lyrics.” This is because <em>ci</em> were composed by poets to fit pre-existing tunes. The number of lines, the line lengths, and the tonal and rhythmic patterns of <em>ci</em> vary with the tunes, which number in the hundreds. One common occasion for composing <em>ci</em> would be a banquet: song lyrics would be scribbled down by guests and then sung by musical performers as entertainment. Other occasions for composing and enjoying <em>ci</em> would be more casual: the poet might sing the lyrics to himself at home or while travelling (many <em>ci</em> poets were civil servants of the Imperial Court and often had to travel great distances to carry out their work). Sometimes the lyrics would be sung by ordinary people in the same way as folk songs. This oral and musical quality sets it apart from other genres of poetry in China during the same period, which were largely written texts with more elevated objectives. There are two main types of <em>ci</em>: <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") and <em>háofàng</em> (豪放, "bold"). The <em>wǎnyuē</em> subgenre primarily focuses on emotion and many of its lyrics are about courtship and love, while the<em> háofàng</em> subgenre often deals with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service.</p> <p>Li Qingzhao was probably one of the most prominent female poets in Imperial China. Born into an elite family of imperial bureaucrats, Li Qingzhao aspired to become a writer even though literature was considered a male domain. She quickly gained fame for her poetic talent and became not only a celebrated composer of ci but also an important critic of the genre. In her view, the male poets composing lyrics for female singers struggled to convey these women’s thoughts and voices convincingly. In her song lyrics, Li Qingzhao offers the modern reader something rare and precious: the inner world of women in medieval China, as imagined by a woman poet. Her songs are often considered to be among the most affecting of the genre.</p> <p>In 1127, when Li Qingzhao was in her forties, the capital city of the Song dynasty (present-day Kaifeng)—the city where Li Qingzhao lived—was conquered by the Jin dynasty in the Jin-Song Wars, along with the northern half of the Song dynasty’s territory. The surviving members of the dynasty consolidated their regime in the south, establishing a new capital city, first in Nanjing, then in Lin’an (present-day Hangzhou). The conquest of Kaifeng marked the end of the Northern Song dynasty and the beginning of the Southern Song dynasty: two distinct eras in the political history of China, and two distinctive periods in Li Qingzhao’s own poetry. Following the invasion of Kaifeng, she moved first to Nanjing and then to Lin’an, where she spent the remaining decades of her life; her husband died in 1129. In contrast to the love themes of her earlier ci, much of her later poetry is concerned with the sorrow of her forced migration and her personal loneliness in her new surroundings.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Chang, Kang-i Sun. <em>The Evolution of Tz’u Poetry: from Late Tang to Northern Sung</em>. Princeton UP, 1980.</p> <ul> <li>A standard survey of the early history of Chinese song lyrics (romanized as both ci and tz’u).</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. “The Song Lyric.” <em>The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature</em>, vol. 1, edited by Stephen Owen, Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 434-452.</p> <ul> <li>An overview of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. <em>The Works of Li Qingzhao</em>. De Gruyter, 2019, pp. 94-198.</p> <ul> <li>A bilingual edition, with Chinese and English translations on facing pages.</li> </ul> <p>Owen, Stephen. <em>Just a Song: Chinese Lyrics from the Eleventh and Early Twelfth Centuries</em>. Asia Center, Harvard UP, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>A recent new history of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋, editor. <em>Quan Song Ci 全宋詞</em>. Zhonghua shu ju, 1965. 5 vols.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive edition of ci from the Song dynasty and the source text for the ci in this collection (introductions and annotations are in Chinese).</li> </ul>
## Credits
Text based on Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋 (ed.). Quan Song Ci 全宋詞. Vol 2. Beijing: Zhonghua shu ju, 1965, 928., Translation by Qian Jia, Notes by Nina Du,  and Runqi Zhang, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Runqi Zhang
