---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  Prologue to the Book of Histories | Li prologue ou livre des estoires
engtitle: |
  Prologue to the Book of Histories
origtitle: |
  Li prologue ou livre des estoires
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/prologue_book_histories"
redirect_from: /text/book-histories-prologue
identifier: prologue_book_histories.md
tei: /assets/tei/prologue_book_histories.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/prologue_book_histories.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [french,]
periods: [13th_century]
textcollections: [making-history]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/prologue_book_histories.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/prologue_book_histories-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 British Library MS Additional 12029 f.22v [Public Domain]

 Ci comence li prologue ou livre des estoires, et la porsivance. Here begins the prologue to the book of histories, and what follows. Segnor, je ai oï retraire Lords, I have heard it said C'on doit adès bien dire et faire That one must always speak and act well Tant con on ou siecle demore For as long as one remains in the world. Li hom ne vit c'une sole ore, A man lives but a single hour Ainz trespasse et va a la fin, Before dying and going to his end. S'il a eü vrai cuer et fin, If he has had a true and pure heart, Que s'uevre ait esté bone et fine; And his work has been good and pure, A cel segnor qui tot afine He has as great a reward En a la desserte si grande As his heart wants and asks for Com ses cuers le veut e demande; from that Lord who brings everything to its end. Car c'est li sires qui tot rent For the Lord returns everything Quanc'on li fait si justement That one does for him so fairly Que ja ne s'en devra nus plaindre. That one must never complain; Por quoi ne se doit nus hom faindre For this reason, one must not make a pretence De lui servir a son pooir: Of serving him to the best of one’s ability: Metre i doit on sens et voloir. One must put meaning and intention into it. Qui si le fai sauve iert sa paine, Whoever acts thus will have his pains guaranteed Quar qui por bon segnor si paine For whoever troubles himself for the good Lord En la fin en a tel merite Has such reward for it at the end Qui mout charement li profite, That it is greatly to his advantage; Et qui siert a mauvais segnor And whoever serves the lord badly Il n'i a ni preu ni honor; Has neither profit nor honour. De ce seit sa pensée certe, May he be certain of this: Ja ne s'en tornera sanz perte. He will never get away without a loss. Li mauvais sires, c'est deables The bad lord is the devil Qui point ne nos est profitables, Who is not useful to us at all Car il het raison et mesure, Because he hates truth and self-restraint, Bonté, loiauté et droiture. Goodness, loyalty and justice. Mout a sergans, et nequedent He has many servants and yet Qu'il le servent a son talent, If they serve him as he desires, E! las, dolent que feront ils? Alas! what will those miserable ones do? Por lor luiers avront escil, Their prize will be exile, Delor parmenable et misere. Eternal pain and misery; Damedéu laissent, le vrai pere, They leave Lord God, the true father, Si se tienent a l'enemi. And hold fast to the Enemy. S[e] il ont si mauvais ami If they are to have such a bad friend, Meaus lor venist que né ne fussent, It would have been better for them that they hadn’t been born, Car ne font pas ce qu'il deüssent. For they are not doing what they should. Crestiein furent apelé They were called Christians Quant il furent regeneré When they were reborn Ens en sains fons, si com il devrent In the holy font, doing as they ought to, E l'uile et la cresme recevrent And received the oil and the chrism; La orent il a Deu covenent There they addressed a covenant to God Qu'en lui creiroient fermement, That they would steadfastly believe in him C'est qui'il adès le serviroient And that they would always serve him E ces comandamens feroient. And follow his commands. Por Deu! segnor, s'il ne le font, By God, Lords, if they don’t do it, Savés quel luier en avront? Do you know what reward they will have? Passé avront obedience; They will have disobeyed; S'amendé n'est par penitence, If this isn't amended by penitence, Perdu en avront la contrée They will have lost the land Que paradis est apellée. Which is called Paradise. Soviegne vos tostans d'Adam May you always remember Adam, Qui en dolor et en ahan Who gave us sorrow and suffering Nos mist par le mors d'une pome. With the bite of an apple. Segnor, Adan, cel premier home Lords, Adam, this first man, Aveit nostre Sires formé, Had been formed and shaped by our Lord A sa semblance et figuré, In his image, E si l'ot mis en paradis And then he put him in Paradise Ou il eüst esté toz dis Where he would have been for evermore Se passé n'eüst son comant, If he hadn’t ignored his command, Dont nos somes encor dolant. For which reason we suffer still. Par le comant qu'il trespassa By the command that he broke Ens el pas de la mort passa; He became mortal; C'en fi mis ens en la paine He was made to suffer the punishment Dont chascuns et chascune paine. Which every man and woman suffers. Seignor, et puis qu'Adans fu mis Lords, since Adam was put Por el fait hors du paradis, Out of Paradise because of this act, Qu'iert il de nos qui chascun jor How will it be for us, who every day Corronssons cent foiz le Segnor Anger the Lord a hundred times — Qui a Adan se corrossa The Lord who became angry at Adam Por un comant qu'il trespassa? For a single command that he disobeyed? Bien nos en devroit sovenir, We ought to remember this well, Mès nos lessomes covenier But we let things simply turn out La choze si come puet estre: as they are wont to do. Ne creons mès ni cler ni prestre We believe neither cleric nor priest Tant no sachent verité dire. Although they can tell us the truth. Li siecles chascun jor enpire; The world grows worse every day: C'est grans dolors et grans tristece. It’s a great misery and a great sadness. Chascuns de bien fere a perece, Everyone is lazy about acting well Ne nus ne redoute la mort And does not fear the death Que si aigrement pince et mort That so painfully pinches and bites Que la dolor ne puet descrire That no saint — male or female — can describe the pain, Sains ni sainte, tant sache dire. however much they can tell us. C'est merveille que ne cremons It’s an extraordinary thing that we do not fear Ce qu'a nos propres oils veons: What we see with our own eyes: C'est ce que la more aprochomes, That we approach death E nos cors acompaigneromes And will accompany our bodies As vers de terre sans orgoill. To meet the worms without pride. N'en porteros c'un soul lensuel, We will wear but a single shroud Dont nos avromes vesteüre. As clothing. Segnor, e n'esteroit mesure Lords, wouldn’t it be reasonable Que nos nos en porpensessimes. For us to reflect on ourselves E nos malisses lessesimes? And abandon our evil ways? Que vaut force, que vaut noblece? What is strength worth? What is nobility worth? Que vaut beautés, que vaut richece? What is beauty worth? What are riches worth? Que vaut hautesce ni parages? What is high status or noble extraction worth? Certes, li hom n'est mie sages Certainly the man who places his trust in all of these Qui en tout ce a sa fiance, Is not wise at all, Car il n'i a fors trespassance. For there is nothing there but death. N'en dirai plus: el ai a faire, I will say no more; I have much to do, Car j'ai entrepris un a faire For I have undertaken to present a matter A traitier selonc l'escriture Following what is written Ou mout avra sens et mesure. In which there will be much meaning and good judgement. Qui la matiere porsivra Whoever follows the content E de cuer i entendera And listens from the heart Oïr porra la plus haute ovre Will be able to hear the worthiest work Qui encor pas ne si descuevre Ever presented in our language: C'onques fust en nos lenge traite. A work which is still unknown. Mès n'ai encor mension faite But I haven’t yet mentioned Ou ne a cui comencerai. Where, or with whom, I will begin. Or fetes pais, jel vos dirai. Now be silent and I will tell you. De Deu est bon li comenciers: It is right to begin with God. A lui comencerai premiers, I will start with him first: Coment Adan forma e fist, How he formed and made Adam, Coment en paradis le mist, How he put him in Paradise, E com Adans entra en paine, And why Adam began to suffer — Por quoi nos vestons dras de laine, For which reason we wear wool cloth; Coment Adans ot sa lignée How Adam had descendants Dont la terre fu alignée. Who covered the earth. N'i lairai riens que d'oir en oir I will not omit anything that Ne doie dire a mon pooir, I ought to tell to the best of my ability, without fault, Trosqu'al doloive sans faillance. Going from generation to generation until the flood. Après n'iere je en doutance After that I will not be in any doubt; De Noé ne doie retraire I must tell of Noah: Quels hom il fu, de quel afaire, What kind of man he was, what he did, De ses enfans, de lor lignage About his children, and their lineage, Ou il out maint prodome e sage Of which many were noble and wise E maint felon e maint mauvais. And many cruel, and many bad. Avant sera li livres fais Before the book is done [I will tell]: Coment les terres devisent How the lands divided E departirent e sevrerent, And moved apart and separated, E qui funda la tor Babel, And who built the Tower of Babel; De Babiloine et dou roi Bel, About Babylon and King Bel, Des autres cités renomées, About other famous cities; Des provinses et des contrées About the regions and countries E des isles qui sunt en mer. And the islands in the sea. Pou en i lairai a nomer, There is little I will refrain from saying about them S'on en doit fere mension, If it should be mentioned; Que n'en doie dire le non, I must say the names E quel roi es terres regnerent, And which kings ruled in the lands Quant eles crivrent e puplerent. When they grew and became populated. Des gens de diverses figures I will tell you everything about Vos dirai totes les natures. Peoples with different appearances. Après l'estoire porsivrai After that, I will continue the history E tot en ordene vos dirai, And tell you everything in order: Coment Ninive fu fondée How Nineveh was founded E Babilonie restorée And Babylon rebuilt Qui dont fu la dame dou monde; Which was, at that time, mistress of the world; De Babilonie la secunde Of the second Babylon Qui or est Damiete dite, Which is now called Damiete Sor le flum siet qui vient d'Egypte, And lies on the river which comes from Egypt, E qui funda Ebbatanin. And who founded Ebbatanin. Si com je le truis ou latin I will tell it to the best of my ability Le vos dirai a mon pooir. Just as I found it in Latin. E après vos ferai savoir And after I will let you know De Tebes tote la devise; Everything about Thebes; Ou Jherusalem est assise I will tell you where Jerusalem is situated, Ce dirai je e en quel terre, And in which land; Qui le funda, qui li fist guerre. Who founded it, and who made war against it. E après ce voudrai retraire And after this I would like to describe De Troies tot le grant afaire, All the great events of Troy: Qui le funda, en quel contrée Who founded it, in which land, E por quoi fu Troie apelée, And why it was called Troy; Qui le destruist et que devindrent Who destroyed it and what became Cil qui la vile grant tens tindrent. Of those who held the city for so long. Après vos redirai la some Afterwards I will tell you the whole De la veraie estoire de Rome, Of the true history of Rome: Qui les murs en funda e fist Who founded and built the walls E les lois premerains i mist. And imposed the first laws; Des haus barons, des jugeors, I will tell you all the work Des contes et des senators Of the great barons, the judges, Vos sera toute l'uevre dite. The consuls and the senators. Après, n'iert pas l'uevre petite, After that the work won’t be small Quant vendra as empereors When it comes to the emperors Qui conquisent les grans honors Who achieved great honours, Par quoi la cités fu cremue On account of which the city was feared E en grant orgoill embatue, And fell into great pride. Car, ce tesmoine le latins, For, the Latin attests to this, Toz li mons fu a Rome aclins, All the world bowed to Rome Quant Cesar Augustus regna. When Caesar Augustus ruled. Après l'estoire porsivra Afterwards the history will continue Tot si com France fu puplée With how France was populated E de quel gent fu abitée; And which people inhabited it. Puis vos voudrai le tens descrire Then I would like to describe for you the time Qu'en terre nasqui nostre Sire In which Our Lord was born on earth, E coment crucifiez fu, And how he was crucified — Ce n'i sera mie teü; That will not be passed over in silence — E com au tiers jor suscita And how on the third day he rose from the dead E ses amis d'enfer geta; And freed his friends from hell, E com au jor d'assension And how, on the day of Ascension Monta en sa grant mansion, He rose to his great house, E coment furent doctriné And how the the apostles Li apostre e enluminé Were instructed and enlightened Dou saint Esperit et de sa grace, By the Holy Spirit and its grace, E par combien après d'espace And afterwards, to what distances Il s'en partirent et sevrerent They departed from one another and separated E par trestot le munt errerent And wandered all over the world Por anuncier la loi novelle, To announce the new law Qui mout par est saintisme e bele. Which is most holy and beautiful. De lors vies la verité I will tell you the truth of their lives Dirai selonc l'auctorité, According to the source; Ou preecherent ou morurent, Where they preached, where they died, Com firent bien que fere durent. How they did what they had to do, and did it well. Des sains, des saintes redirai I will tell you truthfully about the saints - the women and the men - Selonc raison e conterai And I will tell you Sous quels segnors recevre[n]t mort, Under which rulers they received their deaths. As comans Deu se tindrent fort; They held fast to God’s commands; Onques nel laisserent par paine They never abandoned them because of pain Ne por cremor de mort procheine. Or the fear of imminent death. Tot ce fera mout bon oïr, All of this will be very good to listen to, Si s'en devra on esjoïr And one should rejoice Quant on les miracles orra When one hears the miracles Dont Deus lor fais enlumina With which God glorified their actions. Segnor, dont recovendra dire Lords, it will be right to tell Des empereors tot a tire Of the emperors, one after another: Qui primes fu crestienés Who was the first to be christianised E bons crestieins apelez, And be called a good Christian, Regenerés ens es sains fons; Reborn in the holy font; Quant cessa la destrucions When the persecutions ended De ceus qui la loi Deu tenoient Of those who kept God’s law E lui e ses ovres amoient. And loved him and his works. Ce covendra plenierement It will be right to tell this fully and Dire sanz nul delaiement. Without any delays. E puis après, sans demorance, And then [to tell], without pausing, Qui premerains fu rois de France Who the first king of France was Fais crestieins, coment ot non, To be made Christian, what his name was, E de sa generation And of his descendants: Quel furent, coment estorerent Who they were, how they built Les riches glises quíl funderent. The great churches that they founded. Après sera dit en comun Afterwards, it will be told all together Coment le Wandele, Got e Hun How the Vandals, Goths and Huns France pelfirent et guasterent, Pillaged and devastated France E les iglises desrouberent; And robbed the churches; E des Normans vos iert retrait And you will have an account of the Normans E lor conqueste e lor fait, And their conquest and their deeds: Coment destruirent Germanie, How they destroyed Germany, Couloigne e France la guarnie, Cologne and prosperous France, Angou, Poitou, Borgoigne tote; Anjou, Poitou, and all of Burgundy; De ce ne rest il nul doute That there is no doubt Que Flandres Wandes n'envaïssent That the Vandals invaded Flanders E mout de maus ne lor feïssent. And did them many wrongs. De quels gens Flandres fu puplée The history of the peoples who populated Flanders Vos iert l'estoire bien contée, Will be well told for you: Com se proverent, quel il furent, How they proved themselves, who they were, Com il fierent que fere durent, How they did what was necessary. Ce vos sera trestout retrait All of this will be described for you, Tot si a point e tot a trait, Everything at the right moment and at the right pace Que, qui voudra raison entendre, So that anyone who wants to hear the truth Petit i avra a reprendre. Will find little to criticise. L'uevre iert mout bone et delitable The work will be very good and agreeable E d'estoire, sans nulle fable, And composed of history without any fiction; Por ce iert plaisans et creüe And because it has grown from truth, Que de verité iert creüe. It will be pleasing and will be believed. La verité fet bon entendre, The truth is good to hear, Oïr, retenir et aprendre. listen to, remember and learn. Qui verité aime et retient Whoever loves and keeps the truth As comans Damedeu se tient. Is keeping the commands of God. Je n'i veull fors verité dire. I do not want to say anything but truth. Longue en iert assés la matire The content will be quite long Qu'en pensée ai contier a plain That I have in mind to tell in full Por qu'il plaise le chastelain To please the Chatelain De l'Isle Rogier, mon seignor, Of Lille, Roger, my lord; Cui Deus doint santé et honor, May God give him health and honour, Joie [e] paradis en la fin. Joy and, in the end, Paradise. S'il veut, en romans dou latin In accordance with his wishes, I plan to translate the entire text Li cuic si traire lonc la letre From Latin into the vernacular, Que plus ne mains n'i sera metre, And will not put in any more or less Por qu'envie m'en laist en pais, So that envy, Qui a maint home kierche fais Which is a burden to many a man, leaves me in peace. Segnors, envie est male choze, Lords, envy is an evil thing Qu'ele a petit onques repose: That scarcely ever rests: Tempre ne tart ne main ne soir Neither early nor late, neither morning nor evening Ni li lait il le pais avoir. Does it let him have peace. Cuers enveious n'iert ja a eise, An envious heart will never be at ease; Poi voit onques qui bien li plais; It will scarcely ever see something that truly pleases it. Ne ja d'enveious plus ne mains I do not intend to say Ne quier plus dire, mais lontains Any more or less about the envious, but Ne soit il ja ens en sa vie. In one’s life they are never far away. De parlier d'eus n'ai nulle envie. I have no desire to speak about them. Deus les ament qui le puet fere. God reforms them, for he is able. A l'estoire me veull retrere. I wish to turn to the history. Si dirai; qui voudra entendre So I will say, whoever would like to hear it Oïr i porra e aprendre. Can listen and learn. 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>This text is the prologue to a long work of history compiled in Northern France in the first third of the thirteenth century CE. The history was intended to be universal: spanning the creation of the world, through the ancient civilisations of Assyria, Greece and Rome, via the age of migrations in Europe, to the rise of powerful medieval kingdoms. However, the history was not completed and in fact only recounts as far as the Roman emperor Julius Caesar, hence the title commonly given to the work: <i>Histoire ancienne jusqu’à César</i> (<span style="font-family:"Times New Roman",serif">“</span>Ancient History until Caesar<span style="font-family:"Times New Roman",serif">”</span>).</p> <p>Despite being unfinished, the work was immensely popular in medieval Europe, and seventy-four copies survive of the first redaction (the first version, before the text was revised). These manuscripts were produced in places as far apart as Paris, Venice, and Acre (a crusader city in what is now Israel). It is often found in combination with another work of ancient history, the <i>Faits des Romains </i>(<span style="font-family:"Times New Roman",serif">“</span>Deeds of the Romans<span style="font-family:"Times New Roman",serif">”</span>), which indicates the great interest that medieval audiences had in ancient history.</p> <p>The prologue has been included in the <i>Global Medieval Sourcebook</i> because it summarises the entire work (including the unfinished parts) and shows how medieval people in Western Europe wove together Biblical stories with the histories of pre-Christian empires.</p> <p>Although the prologue is in rhymed verse, the main body of the history is in prose, with interspersed sections of verse offering moral lessons drawn from the historical content. However, when the text was recopied, these verse sections (including the prologue) were often omitted. This may suggest that audience expectations about works of history were changing, preferring the voice of the author - or the moral interpretation - to be less prominent.</p>
## Credits
Transcription by Paul Meyer, Translation by Mae Velloso-Lyons, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Mae Velloso-Lyons
