---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  To the tune “Bodhisattva Barbarians”—Sending off Shugu at West Lake | 菩薩蠻 · 西湖
engtitle: |
  To the tune “Bodhisattva Barbarians”—Sending off Shugu at West Lake
origtitle: |
  菩薩蠻 · 西湖
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake"
redirect_from: /text/tune-%E2%80%9Cbodhisattva-barbarians%E2%80%9D%E2%80%94sending-shugu-west-lake
identifier: su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake.md
tei: /assets/tei/su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake.pdf
textauthor: Su Shi 蘇軾
languages: [chinese]
periods: [11th_century]
textcollections: [good-life]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake.jpg
thumb: /assets/img/text/su_shi_sending_shugu_west_lake-thumb.jpg
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 “Detail from 宋錢選蘭亭觀鵝圖卷 (lake)”, 錢選, National Palace Museum, Accession Number: K2A001001N000000000PAB [Public Domain]

 菩薩蠻 To the tune “Bodhisattva Barbarians” 西湖 Sending off ShuguChen Shugu was the prefect of Hangzhou, the city where Su Shi was posted. at West LakeWest Lake is a freshwater lake in the city of Hangzhou. 秋風湖上蕭蕭雨 In the autumn wind, on the lake, the cold and sparing rain 使君欲去還留住。 keeps himRefers to Chen Shugu. when he is about to go. 今日漫留君。 Today, he is held back in vain; 明朝愁殺人。 tomorrow, the sorrow will kill us. 佳人千點淚。 The fair onesThe fair ones are the courtesans at the farewell banquet for Shugu. shed thousands of teardrops, 灑向長河水。 sprinkling onto the Long River“Long River” here refers to Qiantang River.. 不用斂雙蛾。 There is no need to frownThe literal translation is “There is no need to frown the silkworm moth tentacles”. “Silkworm moth tentacles” (蛾) refers to women’s beautiful eyebrows due to their resemblance in shape.; 路人啼更多。 the passersby will cry even more. 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>In 1074 CE, the prefect of Hangzhou, Chen Shugu, was transferred to the Yingtian prefectural court in Henan. Chen Shugu was a friend of Su Shi and the poet wrote this song on the occasion of Chen Shugu’s sendoff at West Lake. The first stanza describes how the natural world itself was moved by the people's affection for Chen Shugu, attempting to defer his departure with a rainstorm. The second stanza continues the conflation of water and tears to portray the sad mood at this farewell occasion.</p> <p>The <em>ci</em> genre of Chinese poetry first emerged in the Sui dynasty (581-619), was further developed in the Tang dynasty (618-907) and matured in the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). <em>Ci</em> is usually translated into English as "song lyrics". This is because <em>ci</em> were composed by poets to fit pre-existing tunes. The number of lines, the line lengths, and the tonal and rhythmic patterns of <em>ci</em> vary with the tunes, which number in the hundreds. One common occasion for composing <em>ci</em> would be a banquet: song lyrics would be scribbled down by guests and then sung by musical performers as entertainment. Other occasions for composing and enjoying <em>ci</em> would be more casual: the poet might sing the lyrics to himself at home or while travelling (many <em>ci</em> poets were civil servants of the Imperial Court and often had to travel great distances to carry out their work). Sometimes the lyrics would be sung by ordinary people in the same way as folk songs. This oral and musical quality sets it apart from other genres of poetry in China during the same period, which were largely written texts with more elevated objectives. There are two main types of <em>ci</em>: <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") and <em>háofàng</em> (豪放, "bold"). The <em>wǎnyuē</em> subgenre primarily focuses on emotion and many of its lyrics are about courtship and love, while the<em> háofàng</em> subgenre often deals with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service.</p> <p><meta charset="utf-8" />Su Shi <meta charset="utf-8" />蘇軾 is one of the most popular Chinese poets of all time, and certainly one of the best-known poets of the Song Dynasty. Among his many roles - principled politician, esteemed poet, celebrated calligrapher - he was also a major reformer of the <em>ci</em> genre. Before Su Shi, the primary form of <em>ci</em> was <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful"). This was considered to be an inferior form of literature due to its thematic focus on love and desire and its association with the courtesans who usually performed it. Su Shi wrote lyrics on a broad range of non-traditional topics, often closely related to his own life experience. His compositions dealt with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service. As a pioneer of the <em>háofàng </em>(豪放, "bold") type of <em>ci</em>, he incorporated references to typically masculine pursuits, including frequent use of a hunting motif. He also frequently incorporated ideas from Buddhist philosophy and allusions to political events, which usually appeared only in more elevated forms of poetry.</p> <p dir="ltr">Although Su Shi was a highly-regarded poet during his lifetime, his political career was consistently unfortunate. In 1066, he was forced to leave the Court when he openly opposed the chancellor’s socio-economic reforms, known as the New Policies. Over the next thirteen years, he was frequently demoted, serving as prefect or sub-prefect in Hangzhou, Mizhou, Xuzhou and Huzhou. Many of his <em>ci</em> reference these postings and the exhaustion of constant travel. A report about the troubling economic conditions of local people written while he was prefect of Huzhou landed him in prison for three months. He was finally sent back to Hangzhou and given a job with no salary. Although living in poverty, he grew fond of Hangzhou and wrote many of his most famous <em>ci </em>there.</p> <p>Because of the occurrence of specific real names and locations in Su Shi's lyrics, as well as the introductory notes he wrote to accompany many of them, his lyrics often invite a biographical reading. This differentiates him from other <em>ci</em> poets featured in this collection, whose writings did not usually reference their own lives in such a direct way. Yet although Su Shi's lyrics evoke specific lived experiences, the enduring popularity of his poetry is due, in part, to the fact that diverse audiences can identify with the feelings he describes.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Chang, Kang-i Sun. <em>The Evolution of Tz’u Poetry: from Late Tang to Northern Sung</em>. Princeton UP, 1980.</p> <ul> <li>A standard survey of the early history of Chinese song lyrics (romanized as both ci and tz’u).</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. “The Song Lyric.” <em>The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature</em>, vol. 1, edited by Stephen Owen, Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 434-452.</p> <ul> <li>An overview of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Owen, Stephen. <em>Just a Song: Chinese Lyrics from the Eleventh and Early Twelfth Centuries</em>. Asia Center, Harvard UP, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>A recent new history of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋, editor. <em>Quan Song Ci 全宋詞</em>. Zhonghua shu ju, 1965. 5 vols.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive edition of ci from the Song dynasty and the source text for the ci in this collection (introductions and annotations are in Chinese).</li> </ul>
## Credits
Text based on Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋 (ed.). Quan Song Ci 全宋詞. Vol 1. Beijing: Zhonghua shu ju, 1965, 303., Translation by Qian Jia, Notes by Nina Du, Runqi Zhang,  and Dante Zhu, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Manya Bansal,  and Dante Zhu
