---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  The Sultan's Daughter in the Flower Garden | Die Sultanstochter im Blumengarten
engtitle: |
  The Sultan's Daughter in the Flower Garden
origtitle: |
  Die Sultanstochter im Blumengarten
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/sultan_daughter"
redirect_from: /text/sultans-daughter-flower-garden
identifier: sultan_daughter.md
tei: /assets/tei/sultan_daughter.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/sultan_daughter.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [german]
periods: [14th_century]
textcollections: [cross-cultural-encounters, prayer-spirituality, gender-sex-sensuality]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/sultan_daughter.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/sultan_daughter-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Berlin, Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Ms. germ. oct. 222, f160r (detail). [Public Domain]

                         Die Sultanstochter im Blumengarten                         The Sultan's Daughter in the Flower Garden                                                                       In der statt zuo Babilon                     In the city of Babylon                     da sass ain herre rich vnd schún,                     lived a wealthy and handsome lord                     der selb was gar ain erlich man                     who was a very honorable man,                     vnd gewaltig — —Bolte suggests that the line is incomplete and offers “als ain soldan” as a completion. The Budapest manuscript for this line is: “gewaltig vnd säldenreich” (powerful and fortunate).                     as well as powerful.                      der hett ain dochter, die was kluog,                     This lord had a daughter who was clever,                     zúchtig was siú genuog,                     and also very well-mannered.                     onmavssen schún vnd tugentrich,                     Immeasurably beautiful and rich in virtue,                     in allen landen was ir nit gelich.                     there was no one like her in the whole world.                     in sinen hof ain bömgart was,                     In the lord’s courtyard, there was a garden                     da sprungent bluoman vnd öch gras,                     where flowers grew as well as grass.                     der was wonneclich vnd schún,                      It was delightful and beautiful —                      die fogel sungent süss gedoen,                     The birds sang sweet melodies, while                     vil rosen dar in sprungent,                     many roses were sprouting and                     [vil gilgen us dem grase drungent,]As with this verse, text appearing inside square brackets hereafter indicates an addition or emendation by the editor, Johannes Bolte, that is not present in the Berlin manuscript.                     [many lilies pressed up through the grass].                     der bavm bluot was rovt vnd wiss,                     The blossoms of the plants were red and white;                     es was ain irdesch paradiss.                      it was an earthly paradise.                     dú iunkfrovw dáglich dar in gieng,                     The maiden went there daily.                     ir gebett siú allweg anfieng,                     She always began her prayers there,                     mit guoter andavcht sú das lass,                     and read them with devotion,                     als sú das gelert was.                     just as she had been taught.                     da warent gilgen vnd rosen vil                     There were many lilies and roses                     vnd ander bluoman [als man wil].                     and other flowers [as is said].                     diu junkfrow schûn vnd zart                     The beautiful and tender maiden                     ainem hochen herren sú gemáchelt ward,                     was betrothed to a noble lord                      der kam mit ainem her dar schuon,                     Who was coming there with a great army.                     des ward im trurun benomen:                     His sadness was being taken away,                     er wund, er sólt frólich hochzit havn,                     for he thought he was going to have a happy marriage;                     es mocht im nit also ergavn.                     but in the end, this wasn’t possible for him.                     vil schún in ir vatter empfieng,                     Her father received him very well.                     haimlich sú zuo dem vatter gieng,                     Unbeknownst to him (the suitor)Insertions in parentheses are my clarifications., she went to her father                     flisseclich sú in batt,                     and eagerly asked him                     dz er ir erlopti ain haimlich statt,                     for permission to go to a hidden place                     da sú ir bett avn allen spot                     where she could say her prayers                     spráchin irem herren got.                     to her lord God without reproach.                     er sprach: vil liebunn tochter min,                     He said, my dearest daughter,                     es sol dir erlovpt sin.                     yes, you may.                     des selben mavls diu iunkfrovwe rain                     At once this pure maiden                     gieng in den garten aber allain,                     went into the garden again, alone —                      siú wolt niement mit ir lavn;                     she did not want to have anyone with her;                     schún rosen sach siú bi ir stavn,                     Standing near her she saw beautiful roses,                     si fand da ainen gilgen stok,                     and among them she found a great lily stalk                     dar vz gewachsen ain michel zog,                     out of which grew                     vil gilgen schún die warent her,                     many beautiful lilies — they were glorious.                     dar an kam ir gedank vil ser,                     Her thoughts then turned in earnest to the fact                     das niemand anderst wárin got,                     that, if she could, she wanted to do the bidding                     kúnd si, si wolt tuon sin gebott.                     of no other than the true God.                     sú gedavcht: ach got, wie schún der ist,                     She thought: “Ah God, how beautiful is he                     der des gewalt havt vnd den list,                     who has the power and intelligence                     das es das schópfen kan!                     to be able to create this!                     ach got, sách ich den selben man,                      Ah, God, if I saw this man,                     ich welt in anbetten fúr got                     I would pray to him as to a God                     vnd welt ovch gern behalten sin gebott,                     and would also gladly follow his commands,                     ich welt im uff die trúwe min                     I would truly                      úmmer vndertánig sin.                     always want to be subject to him.”                     dz fúgt er wol in kurczer frist:                     God brought this to pass a short time later:                     nun merkent, wem got genádig ist,                     now, please take note: to whomever God is merciful,                     wem gnavd von im geschechen sol,                     and on whomever he bestows his grace,                     dz kan er bald fúgen wol.                     He can certainly make this happen quickly.                     dz merk ich bi dem wunder wol,                     This is definitely what I take from the miracle                     wie es der selbun magt ergieng.                     that happened to this maiden.                     es was ir desmavls vmb kainen spott,                     Her words were not in jest:                      ir gefiel recht wol der gilgen got,                     she really did like the God of the lilies.                     ir kam von himel ain liechter schin,                     A bright radiance then came down to her from heaven —                      got der wolt ir genádig sin:                     it was God who wished to bestow grace upon her —                     ain schúner engel kam do dar.                     and a beautiful angel appeared.                     do siú des engels ward gewar,                     When she became aware of the angel,                     von siner schúni si erschrak,                     she shrank back in fear from his beauty                     dz siú vf der erde lag;                     falling to the earth;                     do gefiel er ir ie bas,                     but then he pleased her more and more,                     das was sinemBolte misreads the manuscript here as “siú”, but what he read as a u is clearly an n, which would make the diacritic an abbreviation for, in this case, em. This reading is confirmed by the other manuscript witness (which was unknown to Bolte), which for this line reads: “Das auch seinem recht was vnd ist” (emphasis added). recht wissent daz                     which he found well and good, since he knew                      das guot gaist liebent sich.                     that good spirits love one another                     die boesen [aber] laident sich.                     while evil ones hate each other.                     der engel nam si bi der hand                     The angel took her by the hand                     — — — — — — — — — A series of em-dashes indicates a line that is missing.                     — — — — — — — — —In the Budapest manuscript, line 74: “ir was gen ym gemant” (she was driven towards him)?                     do siú den erst ansach,                     When she first looked at him directly,                     vil zúchteklich si zuo im sprach:                     She spoke to him very courteously:                     eya, vil lieber herren min,                     “Ah, my very dear lord,                     tuo mir uff siner gnavden schin                     reveal (explain?) the light of His grace to me                     vnd hab mir es nit fúr ainen spott:                     and don’t make fun of me:                     sag mir, bist du der hailig got?                     Tell me, are you the holy God?                     wan so wil ich dir dienen wol,                     For if so, I wish verily to serve you,                     darnavch stavt mins hertzen begierd.                     My heart’s desire is set on this.”                     er sprach: nain, ich bin sin knecht.                     He said: “No, I am his servant.                     junkfrow kluog, gesich mich recht                     Clever maiden, behold me truly                     vnd merk, wie ain tropf múg gesin                     and observe how (small) a drop (of water) is in comparison                      gen dem mer vnd gen den Rin,                     to the sea and to the Rhine.                     noch klainer ist die schúni min                     Even smaller is my radiance                      gen dem liebsten edeln herren min.                     in comparison to my dearest noble lord.                     ob du im geren dienen wilt                     If you really want to serve Him                     vnd dich sines dienstes nit beuilt,                     and you do not commend yourself to his service,                     dz ravt ich dir vff die trúwen min,                     Then I counsel you truly                     des soltu mir gefölgig sin.                     To do as I say.”                     des engels schúni ducht si gröss,                     She thought the angel’s glow was glorious,                     wie lútzel si der red verdross.                     how little she was burdenedAlso possible, “bored.” by his speech!                     si sprach: vil lieber herre min,                     She said: “my very dear lord                     ich wil dir gern gefölgig sin;                     I will gladly do as you say:                     wist ich nun, wz im wär gezám.                     if only I knew what would be suitable for Him,                     oder was dienstes er von mir nám,                     or what service He would accept from me!                     des welt ich úmer haben ruom                     For this (service) I would wish always to have renown forever                     vnd welt es willenclichen tuon.                     and would do it willingly.”                     er sprach: so solt du kúnsch sin.                     He said: “Then you must be chaste.”                     si sprach: ach sússer herre min,                     She said: “Ah, my sweet lord,                     ich fúrcht, es si versummet gar,                     I fear, it is too late,                     man wil hinacht [min] nemen war                     There is someone who intends to take me right after this;“War nemen” in this context also means to know physically, as in have sex with.                     er ist ietz hie vff minen schaden,                     he is here now, to my detriment.                     ich welt, ich wár im entladen.                     I wish, I were released from him.”“Ich welt, ich wár im entladen…” literally, I wish I was unloaded from him, as in property (the verb is used both in connection with unloading a horse, and also the unloading of one’s emotions such as sorrow and guilt).                     er sprach: ich gib dir noch wol rät,                     He said: “I will tell you what to do                     ob es an dinem willen stät;                     if that is your will;                     glob mir, ich hilff dir uss [der] novt!                     Believe me, I will help you out of this fix!”                     ir baid hend sy im dar bott:                     She offered him both her hands:                     ich wil dir úmmer gehorsam sin                     “I will be obedient to you forever                     úmer [unz] vff das ende min.                     and ever until my death.”                     er graiff ir linden an ir hand,                     He took her gently by the hand,                     vff zoch er si ze hand,                     and whisked her off immediately,                     er fuort si in ainer clainer wil                     moving her in a short span of time                     me denn trútusent mil.                     more than three thousand miles away.                     es ducht si gar ain kurtzer weg,                     Yet it seemed to her a very short journey,                     si kam weder vff brugg noch vff steg.                     for she tread on neither bridge nor path.                     vil zart vnd súss was sin ler.                     Very tender and sweet was the teaching                     die er si lert vff dem ker,                     that he taught her on the way.                     in ain closter er si bravcht.                     He brought her to a cloister.                     dz hett ir gemachel nit gedavcht.                     This would not have occurred to her betrothed!                     er wolt ir mit fróden niemen“niemen” is clearly a variant spelling of “nemen” here. war,                     He truly wanted to have the joy of knowing her,See above, note 5.                     sin fród was im gezukt gar,                     but his joy was wrenched away from him.                     irem vatter er do wider seit,                      To her father he then said                     dz er in betrogen hett,                     that he had betrayed him                     an tavberBolte misreads the initial letter as c and in his edition where he has “cáber [?].” The manuscript clearly shows a t in “taber” (here with a dipthongized vowel, “tavber”) means “fortress/castle” (fol. 163r). fuor er von dannan.                     and then he left the castle and departed from that place.                     ir vatter was ain trurig man                     Her father was a sad man                     vnd tett im des von herczen novt.                     and this matter gave him great pain.                      er wust, das si nun lang wer tovt,                     Yet only when he realized that she was probably long dead,                     erst huob sich sin novt.                     did he really begin to grieve.                     Disen haiden súllen wir trurun lavn                     We should let this heathen mourn                     vnd wider zuo der iunkfröwun gan.                     and return (our attention) to the maiden.                     nun hórent aber gern dz:                     Now listen to this!                     der engel, der fieng an                     The angel, he began                     vnd seit ir vil súss,                     to tell her very sweetly                     wie got die kúnschen magt grúst,                     how God greets chaste maidens,                     vnd wie vil gnavden diú kúnschait havt,                     And how much grace is in the chastity                     der si mit rainenBolte’s “ramen”  has been corrected to “rainen” after consulting the manuscript (fol 163b). herczen treit.                     that they bear in a pure heart.                     er sprach: Kúnschait ist min schwester,                     He said: “Chastity is my sister                      — — — — — —                     — — — — — — —                     vnd der engel dre in dem himelrich sint,                     and also (the sister) of the angels who are in heaven,                     siú ist der gilgen gottes kind,                     and she is the child of the God of the lilies.                     Kúnsch ist des obrosten gemachel,                     Chastity is the most supreme spouse,                     Liebin ist vil sterker denn stachel.                     love is stronger than a stinger.”                     er seit ir sússikait noch gar vil,                     He told her many more sweet things,                     wie hoch got die kúnschait setzen wil:                     like how high God wishes to elevate Chastity:                     got nimpt si vornan an den tantz,                     God chooses her before all others in the dance;                     kúnschait ist aller tugent ain krantz.                     Chastity is a crown of all the virtues.                     von got vnd von Maria zart                     Of God and of tender Maria                     kunt er, wie diú sin muoter ward                     he informed her: how she became His mother                     vnd in enpfieng vn ovch gebar,                     and conceived and also bore Him;                     ir leben vnd ir liden gar,                     of her life and all her suffering, and                     wie got an dem crútz erstarb,                     how God died on the cross                     da mit er ´vns vil gnavd erwarb;                     so that He could attain grace for us.                     von got vnd aller himel schar                     He told her of God and                      seit er ir, von ordnung gar                     of the entire heavenly throng and of the whole order of things;                     er was ir ain wiser vor.                     He was a wise mentor to her.                     er fuort si in zu dem tor                     He took her to the tower                      des fröwen closters in der nacht,                     of a convent during the night.                     daz tett er als mit gottes macht                     He did this with God’s might                     durch gantz wand mit beschlossener túr:                     through thick walls and locked door:                     ain vil grovss wunder ich spúr.                     In this I detect a very great miracle!                     vil lins er si da nider liess,                     He lowered her down gently                     fuor den altavr er sie do sitzen hiess,                     in front of the altar and then bid her sit down.                     an di guoten statt                     He bade her to sit still                     still (sy) sitzent er si battr,                     in this good spot                     bis das die frowen kámen                     until the ladies came                     vnd disiú már vernáment.                     and heard her tale.                     sie tett alles das, das er sie hiess.                     She did everything he asked.                     ainen liehten schin er vmb si liess,                     He [then] surrounded her in a bright light,                     ainen brieff gab er ir do in die hand,                     and in her hand, he put a letter                     dar an menig schún geschrift was                     that contained much beautiful writing —                     dz edel wunder avne wank,                     this noble miracle tale in its entirety;                     ir baider red kurcz vnd lang                     what each of them said, the angel and the good maiden,                      dez engels vnd der iunkfrovwun guot,                     whether brief or lengthy;                     vnd was sie hett in irem muot,                     what she had in her mind;                     vnd wer si vor was vnd wie si kam dar,                     and who she was before and how she came there.                     dz was schún geschriben an                     All that was beautifully written down                     mit rotem gold, vnd wer es las,                     in red gold letters, and whoever read it                     der sach, daz si ain haidin was                     saw that she was a heathen                     vnd den tovff noch nie empfieng.                     and had not yet been baptized.                     der engel si vor dem altar lie;                     The angel left her in front of the altar.                     dise red, die er mit ir tett,                     She found the teaching that he had given her                     ducht si minneclich vnd súss.                     lovely and sweet.                     der engel si vil geren sach,                     She gladly gazed at the angel.                     vil zartlich vnd schuon si zuo im sprach:                     Very tenderly and beautifully she said to him:                     ach lieber herr vnd engel min,                     “Ah, my dear lord and angel,                     lavss mich dir enpholchen sin;                     Allow me to be received by you,                     ich havn mich dir ergeben gar,                     I have given myself to you completely,                     nim min in minen nöten war!                     Take me in my moment of need!The verb is again “warnemen” and her address here to the angel echoes the language of marriage/sex that she rejected with the earthly lord. No doubt, this serves as evidence for the reader that she is still a heathen, a novice in Christian behavior, and that she still has a lot to learn.                     din red ist zuker súss,                     Your words are as sweet as sugar,                     minen herren du mir grúss;                     Greet my lord for me;                     mit dienst bin ich im berait,                     I am ready to serve Him,                     mit willeklicher arbait.                     With willing toil.                     wan vatter vnd muoter vnd magen min,                     For your sake I am leaving                      die lassen ich durch den willen din,                     my father, mother, and kin                      grossen richtum lavss ich faren.                     and I am letting go of great wealth.                     sag im, er sóll mich wol bewaren!                     Tell Him to protect me well!                     vnd [grúss] ovch mir die maget súss,                     And also greet the sweet virgin [Mary] from me,                     von der du mir vil havst geseit,                     about whom you have told me so much,                     die die kúnschait des ersten anfieng;                     and who was the first to be chaste;                     sag ir, durch ir kind sitz ich hie                     Tell her, I have sat down and am sitting here                      vnd si allain gesessen,                     because of her child and her alone,                     si sol min nit vergessen;                     and that she should not forget me.                     dz zimpt iren gnavden wol,                     That would befit her great compassion well,                     wan ich nit waiss, wav ich sol.                     for otherwise, I do not know where I should (turn).”                     vil zartlich schied er do von ir,                     Then he very tenderly took his leave.                     er sprach: wiss, iunkrow, got ist mit dir.                     He said: “Know this, maiden, God is with you.”                     Nun wist si nit, wa siú sass,                     Now, she did not know where she was,                     diú sprach des landes ir unbekant wz.                     nor was the language of the land familiar to her.                      diú áptissinn des closters da                     The abbess of the cloister                     diu kam gegangen iesa                     came along just then                     navch ir aller gewonhait                     which was her regular habit —                      sú was táglich des ersten berait,                     She was always the first to be ready                     da man got dienen solt,                     when it was time to sing the office.                     in dem kor si wolt.                     (And so) she headed to the choir.                     do siu aller erst tratt hin in,                     At the moment she stepped into the choir,                     si sach die maget vnd den schin;                     She saw the maiden surrounded by light;                     vil bald kert siú sich wider uss,                     She turned around quickly and went back out.                     siu liuff bald in das schlavfhuss,                     She sped to the dormitory                     diu frowan siu bald wakt                     Where she immediately woke the ladies, though calmly                     vil schuon, dz si si nit erschrakti.                     So that they wouldn’t be alarmed.                     do siu si all ze samen bravcht,                     When she had brought them all together,                     siu seit in, was si sach vnd bedavcht;                     She told them what she saw and thought;                     siu sprach: ich wil hiut veriechen,                     She said: “I want to tell you today,                     ich havn Mariun selb gesechen,                     That I have seen Mary herself,                     diu wil úns hiut erun;                     She wants to honor us today;                     zuo der sond wir keren                     We should return to her                     vnd sóllent si enphavchen.                     And should welcome her.”                     siu begund vor an hin gavchen,                     She rushed ahead of them,                     nach ir was gavch in allen,                     and all of them rushed after her                     si hettent sich navch erfallen.                     so fast that they almost fell down.                     si savchent die iunkfrovwen sin                     They saw the maiden                      vil herlich sitzen in iren schin.                     Sitting nobly in the light.                     si vielent fúr si an ir knie,                     They fell to their knees before her,                     Salue regina sungent si,                     [and] sang the Salve Regina,                     dz betút: gotwilkomen kúnginn,                     which means: “God welcome you, Queen.                     von vns solt du gegrússet sin.                     May you receive our greeting!”                     hie von ich nit me sagen wil.                     About that I have nothing more to say.                     der eren was ir doch ze vil,                     This honor was of course too much for her (the maiden).                     súss sungent ir múnd rot,                     Their red mouths sang sweetly                     den brief siu der áptissinen bot.                     as she offered the letter to the abbess                     vil bald siu den úber las                     who read through it quickly                     vnd las, wie es ergangen was.                     and saw how things had gone.                     diss wunders wavrent sie alle frow,                     They were all happy about this miracle                     dz si got geeret hett also                     that God had thus honored them                     fúr allú klóster in dem land,                     above all other cloisters in the land                     den er sóllich botschaft litzel sant;                     to which He had sent no such message;                     vil fród an iren hertzen lag,                     Their hearts were filled with great joy                     si erbietten des tags.                     (while) they waited for the day to dawn.                     ir aller sprách was ir vnkund,                     Their language was entirely unknown to her,                     vil schier funden si den fund,                     and so the sisters very quickly realized                      dz si hain santent in die statt                     that they should send a messenger into the city,                     ainen botten, der den bischof batt,                     who would ask the bishop                     das er kám zuo in dar                     to come to them                     vnd des wunders námi war.                     and see the miracle.                     vil pfaffent er do zuo im nam,                     The Bishop gathered many clerics around him                     mit fróden er do zuo in kam,                     and then gladly went to them.                     den brief er do úber lass,                     He then read through the letter                     er sach, das si ain haidin was                     and saw that she was a heathen                     vnd das diss alles got wolt,                     and that God wished                     das man si da tóffen solt.                     her to be baptized.                     do er den brief hett vss gelesen,                     When he had read the letter to the end,                     er wolt do selb ir tott wesen                     He himself wanted to be her Godfather                     vnd töft si selb mit siner hand                     and he baptized her with his own hand                     vff der fart. diú äptissin si tovd fand                     while he was there. The abbess                      an allen sachen,                     found her deadThe Berlin manuscript has “tõd” here, which could be a mis-writing of “totte” or “tottin” (meaning patroness or Godmother). See footnote 11 for the reading of the Budapest manuscript.                     als man ain gaistlich mensch                      in (to?) all things,                     sol machen.                     as a spiritual person should be.It's possible some lines are missing here. The Budapest manuscript has the following for this passage, which is also somewhat difficult to interpret: “Er pesneid si do in weis gewand/ Das pracht man dar mit list/ Sy stuend czu der selben frist/ vnd auch auf der selben vart/ die aptissin do ir got ward/ Do sy nun was christin worden/ Do gaben sy ir den orden.” (Then he dressed her in white clothing -- that was cleverly done -- She stood at the same time and at the same time, the abbess then became her Godmother. When she had become a Christian, the abbess gave (taught) her the rule.)                     do si was crastan worden,                     When she had become a Christian,                     do gab siu ir den orden                     she (the abbess) then gave her the rule                     vnd die pfrúnd zem kloster.                     and her dowry to the cloister.                     da man schloft sy in gewand,                     Then they dressed her in a robe                     daz wz graw — — — —Bolte assumes missing text here, as well as an additional missing line (not included in the line count).                     That was gray. — — —                     si wavrent all des wunders frow,                     They were all happy about the miracle                     Te deum laudamus sungent si do,                     and then they sang Te deum laudamus,                     die priester alt vnd iung                     all the priests, old and young                     vnd di gantz samnung,                     and the whole assembly.                     diss lob si sungent avne spott                     They sang this earnestly                     der rosen vnd der gilgen got.                     to the God of roses and lilies.                     dar navch hiess man si leren,                     After that they had her taught –                     ir hail dz wolt sich meren;                     her holiness wanted to grow!                     siu gelernet in kurtzer frist,                     She learned in a short time                     dz siu kund aller hand list                     that she had all kinds of ability                     singen, lesen vnd schriben,                     In singing, reading, and writing,                      — — — — — —                     — — — — — — —                      ir tugent was mengualt vnd grovss,                     Her virtue was manifold and great:                     allú wisshait ir zuo floss.                     all wisdom flowed to her.                     diu áptissin dar navch starb,                     Soon thereafter, the abbess died.                     ir lútzel navch ir ampt warb,                     Few of the sisters applied for her office,                     wan si ducht allgemain,                     For it seemed to them all                     wie disiu iunkfrow rain                     that this pure maiden                     vnder in diu best wár úber all;                     was the best of all among them.                     dar zuo gäben si die wal,                     For this reason, they voted                     dz si diu áptissin sólt sin,                     that she should be the abbess                     diu da vor was ein ha[i]                     who had previously been a heathen.                     niement hie voll sagen kan,                     No one here can really say                     wes glúks dz kloster do gewan                     how much good fortune the convent won                     an eren vnd an guot,                     in honor and in goodness because of this.                     dz geschuof diu wolgemuot;                      This created an atmosphere of good will and well-being.                     mit wishiat kund siu des klosters pflegen,                     She was able to manage the cloister with wisdom,                     got der het ir sinen segen                     for God had sent her his blessing                     vnd alles hail zuo gesent.                     and everything holy.                     wie schön si das wolt, si lert                      As beautifully as she wanted, she taught                     si all tugend nacht vnd tag,                     them all the virtues night and day;                     wie lútzel si dar an erlag.                     How little she lay down on the job!                     von kúnschait lert si zuo aller zit,                     She taught of chastity at all times:                     siu lert, was genavd dar an lit;                     She taught about the grace that is inherent in it;                     von der kúnschait besunder                     and of chastity in particular,                     seit siu menig wunder,                     she told many miracle stories,                     wan dz was ir vil wol kunt                     for these were made known to her                     worden von des engels mund.                     by the angel’s mouth.                     ir ler was guot vnd rain,                     Her teaching was good and pure                     noch sússer denne der huonig sain,                     even sweeter than honey.                     siu lert si allen, das si sturben,                     She taught them all, so that when she died                     dz si gottes huld erwurben.                     She would attain God’s favor.                     siu was áptissin drissig iar,                     She was abbess for thirty years,                     siu dienot got avn alle swavr.                     serving God without any difficulty.                     der engel dar navch zuo ir kam,                     At the end of this time, the angel who had                     der si dórt vss dem garten nam,                     taken her out of the garden came to her                     er sprach: iunkfrow, diu zit ist hie,                     and said: “Maiden, the time has come,                     du havst misstretten nie,                     You have never had a misstep,                     du havst behalten min gebott;                     and have followed my orders;                     der rosen vnd der gilgen got                     The God of roses and lilies                     havt mich gesant zuo dir,                     has sent me to you —                      her navch dir stavt mins hertzen begir.                     my heart’s desire is longing for you.                     du solt dich cristanlich bewaren,                     See that you keep Christian rule                     so wil ich bald navch dir faren                     and I will come for you soon,                     von hút an dem dritten tag,                     three days from today.                     da von merk eben, was ich dir sag.                     Mark you well what I tell you now:                     so erzaig wir dir, das ich dir verhiess,                     in this way we will fulfill the promise I made you                     do du den haiden faren liest.                     When you left the heathen.”                     dú iunkfrow ward der red frow,                     This speech made the maiden happy,                     sinem sússen rat folget siu do,                     and so she followed his sweet counsel                     die frowan hiess si kommen dar.                     and called the ladies to her.                     do kament si vnd nament war,                     When they came and heard                     was siu in seit an der stund,                     what she said at that moment,                     in ward ain laidiges már kunt.                     a sad tale was made known to them.                     siu gab in do iren getrúwen ravt,                     She gave them her true counsel,                     si hiess si baidú frú vnd spavt                     she bid them love God diligently                     got flisseclichen minnen                     both morning and night                     mit hertzen vnd sinnen                     with heart and mind,                     vnd mit fliss all tugent havn,                     and keenly uphold all the virtues,                     so mócht es in och wol ergavn.                     so that it would go well for them.                     ir aller iavmer der was grovss,                     Their shared grief was so great                     das wasser inen vss den ovgen floss                     that tears flowed out of their eyes,                     sie wundent all ir hend;                     and they wounded all of their hands (from wringing).                     hie nam ir gewalt ain end,                     Thus ended her rule (as abbess):                     des dritten tags do lag si tovd,                     On the third day she lay dead,                     also schied sy von aller novt.                     and she departed from all sorrow.                     des selben tags kam der engel                      On the same day, the angel came                     vnd nam ir sel zartlich mit im                     and gently took her soul with him                     und fuort si in das himelrich                     and led her to heaven                     zuo andren mágten minneclich,                      to the other loving maidens.                     da ward er all ir fród gantz,                     In this way, he became the fulfillment of all their joy:                     er fuort si an der iunkfrowan tantz.                     He brought her to the dance of the virgins.                     gross iamer sich hie huob,                     Great lament arose here (on earth)                     vil erlich man si do begruob,                     as they buried her with honor                     ob irem grab si sungen:                     and sang over her grave:                     ir ist recht wol gelungen.                     She had had a great success:                     got selber gen ir gie                     God himself had gone to her;                     gar wunneclich vnd minneclich er sie empfieng,                     joyfully and full of love he had received her                     er fuort si an der engel schar:                     and led her to the host of angels.                     got helff vns allen zuo ir dar.                     God help us all to join her.                     Diss sol man geren hóren lesen,                     This [tale] should be gladly heard told                     der der kúnschait dester hólder well wesen;                     To anyone who wishes to be that much more beholden to chastity;                     wan wer die kúnschait lieb havt,                     For whoever holds chastity dear,                     dem mag es hie och wol ergavn,                     for him it will go well in this life,                     wer sich ir versummet havt,                     Whoever neglects it,                     dem wil ich geben den ravt,                     him I would counsel                     das er si geren behalt;                     to preserve it gladly;                     wan got der kúnschait walt                     For God governs chastity                      vnd die vil lieb muoter sin,                     and His very dear mother,                     die hoch himel kúnigin vnd kaiserin,                     the high Queen and Empress of heaven,                     die wz die erst, die kúnschait erkos,                     she was the first to choose chastity.                     da von ir hail ist worden grovss,                     because of which her holiness has greatly increased                     dar nach vil menig iunkfrow her,                     and after which very many maidens followed her,                     dis von ir havnd genomen ler.                     (that is, they followed) this lesson from her hand.                     den kúnschen git si hochen lon,                     She gives high praise to the chaste ones,                     sie setzt in vff der mágte kron.                     she places the maidenly crown upon their heads.                     wer aber sich ir versummet havt,                     However, he who has neglected it,                     der tuo sich der vnkúnsch wider ab                     if he rids himself once again of corruption                     vnd hab dar an vil státten muot,                     and then is very steadfast in this,                     so mag sin ding noch werden guot.                     then things can improve for him.                     wer unkúnsch lavt, e das sú in laut,                     Whoever relinquishes corruption, before it spoils him,                     eye wie wol es im ergavt!                     ah, how well it will go for him!                     dz sag ich mannen vnd wiben,                     This I say to men and women:                     das si vil stát dar an beliben                     that they remain steadfast in this                     vnd folgen miner lere [n]                     and follow my teaching                     vnd sich da von kere [n].                     and turn away from corruption.                     her Salomon gesprochen havt,                     Lord Solomon has said                     das fliechen si der beste ravt.                     that being clean is the best advice.Cleanliness is next to Godliness?                     wer kúnsche beliben well vnd das mag tuon,                     Whoever wants to and is able to remain chaste,                     dem git got grovssen luon.                     God will give him great praise.                     got der git im die obrosten kruon                     God will give him the highest crown                     in sinem hóchsten tron.                     in his highest throne.                     da mit havt diss buoch ain end,                     Herewith the book is at an end,                     got vns sinen hailigen segen send                     may God send us His holy blessing                     vnd verlich vns allen ain guotes end. Amen                     and solemnly grant us all a good end.  Amen 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p><em>The Sultan’s Daughter in the Flower Garden</em> is a 400-line rhymed couplet text in Middle High German that was probably composed anonymously in the 14th century. Categorized in scholarship as a “Klosterlegende”  or monastery legend, but also exhibiting characteristics of saints’ lives, courtship narratives, stories of noble “heathens” who convert, as well as of <em>docta ignorantia</em> (learned ignorance) and Marian literature, the narrative was probably translated from a no longer extant Latin source and is also transmitted in low German prose versions, as well as in song form. While the prose versions have a “modest” transmission in late medieval manuscripts and early modern prints, the songs’ reception stretches into the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The Middle High German rhymed couplet version presented here appears, however, in only two late fifteenth-century manuscripts: Berlin, Staatsbibiliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, mgo 222, dated to after 1475, and Budapest, Bibl. et Archivum P. P. Franciscanorum, Cod. Esztergom 11, dated to around 1500. Both manuscripts were produced in the southern German-speaking areas and tell the following story: After learning of the arrival of a foreign nobleman whom her father wishes her to wed, the daughter of the Sultan of Babylon goes into their beautiful garden. Among the flowers, she marvels at the beauty of the lilies, whereupon an angel appears and recruits her to worship the God who made them, as long as she can commit to complete chastity. She agrees and he whisks her 3000 miles away, instructing her in the Christian mysteries along the way. The angel delivers her to a convent. where she is accepted, baptized, educated, and eventually becomes abbess.</p> <p>The dominant aspects of the tale situate it most comfortably in the traditions of Marian literature and<em> docta ignorantia </em>narratives. The references to lilies, to chastity, and to the annunciation from the angel in an enclosed garden come into greater relief in the Berlin manuscript compilation, which includes a number of other texts relating to the Marian tradition (e.g., a <em>pater noster</em> exegesis, a treatise about the rosary, a devotion to Mary, a set of Marian miracles, and an allegory about the heart as cloister). This focus corresponds to the known ownership of the manuscript, which, as indicated in the pastedown on the inside front cover, was a reformed convent of Augustinian nuns in Inzigkofen, a town located about 25 miles north of Lake Constance. In contrast, the Budapest manuscript, most likely produced in a Franciscan context, seems more interested in instructing an audience of lay noblemen in the benefits of giving up their sinful behavior and embracing a more chaste existence for the sake of their fate in the afterlife. Accordingly, the other texts included in the Budapest compilation, many more of which are in verse—as opposed to the Berlin manuscript, where only the Sultan’s Daughter text is rhymed—focus on the concepts of sin and confession (e.g., model confession texts, a Latin catalogue of sins, verse prayer for a good end, a <em>Totentanz</em>, the dream vision of <em>Tundalus</em>, a section from the <em>Lucidarius</em> on the afterlife, and two secular rhymed couplet tales: <em>The Count of Savoy</em> and <em>The Knight in the Chapel</em>).</p> <p>The text is noteworthy more for its content than for its poetic attributes, the rhymes and imagery being relatively mundane. The combination of the variety of narrative models into one tale is of interest, however, as well as the miraculous trajectory of the clever maiden from an object of exchange between men in Babylon to model Christian, scribe, teacher, and ultimately abbess of a German convent. In addition, the focus in the text on the choice to obey the angel, that is, on the maiden’s agency in determining her fate, is also striking.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Poor, Sara S. “Imagining the Origins of a Clever Woman: The ‘Sultanstochter’ and the Path to Learning in the Late Medieval Devotional Book.” <i><span style="color:black">Mendicant Gender Discourse(s) - Comparative Studies, Reti Medievali</span></i><span style="color:black"> vol. 41, forthcoming 2021. </span></p> <ul> <li><span style="color:black">Thorough introduction to the text, including detailed analysis of manuscript context.</span></li> </ul> <p>Poor, Sara S. “Women Teaching Men in the Medieval Devotional Imagination.” <i>Partners in Spirit: Women, Men, and Religious Life in Germany, 1100-1500</i>, edited by Fiona J. Griffiths and Julie Hotchin. Brepols, 2014, pp. 339–65.</p> <ul> <li>Readings of late medieval German narratives of <i>docta ignorantia</i> featuring women, the manuscripts that transmit them, and the historical context.</li> </ul> <p>Morgan, Ben. “The Pleasure of the Text: What Two Manuscripts Can Tell Us About Becoming God.” <i>Medieval Mystical Theology,</i> vol. 23, no. 1, 2014, pp. 52–64.</p> <ul> <li>Examination of the Kirchheim reception of the related narrative, the Sister Catherine Treatise, with a focus on its theological content.</li> </ul> <p>Winston-Allen, Anne. <i>Stories of the Rose: The Making of the Rosary in the Middle Ages.</i> Pennsylvania State UP, 1997.</p> <ul> <li>Informative study of the late medieval Marian literature through the evolution of the rosary and the poems, texts, and gardens associated with it. Includes excellent bibliography and also many illustrations.</li> </ul>
## Credits
Transcription by Johannes Bolte, Translation by Sara S. Poor, Introduction by Sara S. Poor, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Dante Zhu
