---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  The Trojan War | Der Trojanerkrieg
engtitle: |
  The Trojan War
origtitle: |
  Der Trojanerkrieg
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/trojan_war"
redirect_from: /text/trojan-war
identifier: trojan_war.md
tei: /assets/tei/trojan_war.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/trojan_war.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [german]
periods: [13th_century]
textcollections: [making-history]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/trojan_war.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/trojan_war-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 British Library MS Harley 4376 f.90 [Public Domain]

 Der Trojanerkrieg The Trojan War Ektor und sein bruder Baris Hector and his brother Paris leptten ze Troy in kúnklicher wis. lived in Troy in a manner befitting kings. eins tages ward Baris kunt getan, One day, Paris was told daz ze Krichen trüg die kron that in Greece daz allerschonste wib, the most beautiful woman ever born die ye getrug mutterlip. wore the crown. die was Elena genant. She was called Helen. uf hub sich der degen zehant. The hero left immediately. er fur in Kriechenlant, He travelled to Greece, daz er wolt beschuwen so that he could see die wunder an der früwen. the marvels of this woman. uu was ir vatter und Menelaus ir As it happened, her father and Menelaus, man ein hervart gevarn. her husband, had left on military campaign. nu wart der edel degen wis As it happened, the noble and clever hero was geschossen mit der mine stral. pierced by love’s ray. des leit sin hereze vil senden qual, From this his heart suffered much yearning sorrow, und ward sin leben kumerlich. and his life became miserable. ein kindlin hat die kúngin rich, The powerful queen had a little child das ir die ame trug dike nach. that her wet nurse often carried close by. eins tages gieng die kúngin One day the queen passed by fúr Baris den degen vin. Paris, the fine hero. als si fúr in kam, When she passed by him zu der erde buktte er sich he bent down to the ground und kuste iren fustrit. and kissed her footprint. die ame sach den sit, The wet nurse saw the gesture den det sy ir fruwen kunt. and informed her lady of it. von der selben stund From that moment nam sy sin besser war she noticed him und neigt in dike gúetlich dar. and nodded to him in a kindly manner. Baris die amen grůste tugentlich Paris greeted the wet nurse in a courtly fashion mit grosscr gabe herlich. with great and splendid gifts. daz kint kuste er dik lieplich. He kissed the child very lovingly. er und die ame begunden He and the wet nurse began legen an to conspire wie er die fruwen furt von dan. how he could abduct the lady. die amme sprach: The wet nurse said: nút lenger súllent irs sparn. "You should not delay any longer. ir súellent heil varn You should return home und kóment her wider mit úwer schar and come back with your men uf dem mer gevarn. by sea. darine fúerent irs mannes van, Fly her husband’s flag, der ist swarcz und wis getan. which is black and white. die früwe bringe ich I will then bring the lady in úwer schiff dan, onto your ship, so dond den, daz úch dunke gut. then you may do whatever you wish." dis det der helt bochgemut. This the high-spirited hero did. er kam in einem monat wider. He came back in a month. do man uf der ner swimen sach, When he sailed into view on the sea, die amme zu der früwen sprach: the wet nurse said to the lady: früwe, es kunt der kúng min ber. “Lady, the king, my lord, is approaching. wir söllent gen im gon etwo ver, We should venture out to meet him daz wir enpfahen der heren min. so that we may receive my lord appropriately.” die kúngin sprach: es sol sin. The queen said: "It will be done." also kam sy in daz schiff hinin. And so she came upon his ship. Baris minenklich si enpfie Paris greeted her lovingly. von lant hies er die schiff stossen hin. He commanded the ship to be set sail. also broclht er sy von dan. Thus he abducted her. dis ward irem man It was told to her husband in die reisse kunt getan, on his travels daz von Troy der kung rich that the powerful king of Troy het im genomen die kúngin herlich. had taken the beautiful queen from him. uf brachen sy mit der schar They departed with their men und fúrent gen Troy dar and then traveled towards Troy mit allen den fúrsten gar, with all the princes die uf der erden woren who were on earth by denselben jaren, at that time. und slügen uf ir gezelt They put up their tents vor Troy uf daz eben velt. on the plain before Troy. Ektor und Paris hiessen, Hector and Paris commanded daz sy nút růwen liessen, that they not cease fighting daz man mit strites sitt with them daily teglich mit in stritt.  in a warlike manner. also tatten sy den Kreichen ungemach, So they made so much trouble for the Greeks daz man si seltten ruwen sach, that one rarely saw them resting, iecz bi tag, den bi nacht. either by day or by night. wie krefftig wer der Kriechen macht, Although the Greek’s power was mighty, so beslos man ze Troy nie kein tor, at Troy they never closed a single gate wand daz hat verbotten Ektor. because Hector had forbidden it. keinen tag lies er sie an strit. He didn’t let a single day pass without fighting. nu fügtte es sich ze einer zit, Now it came to pass, daz Ektor so gar úberhuffet ward. that Hector was completely overpowered. mengem er sin gewand zerzart. He split the armor of many, daz er müste werden siech. so that he became utterly spent. do rüffte ein edel Kriech: There, a noble Greek called out: es wer schad umb disen helt. "It would be a pity if this hero died. hora, degen userwelt, Listen, chosen warrior. rúeff an den dinem kry, call out your battle cry, ob dir ieman so noche sy, in case there is someone close by, der dir múg ze helffe komen, who might come to your help, daz dir der lip icht werd genomen so that your life is not taken from you!" Ektor horte disen wissen rat. Hector listened to this wise counsel. er fulgtte getrat. He followed it immediately.  do ward im helffe schin There help appeared von den dieueren sin. in the form of his retainers. Der kúng von Kricchen sprach: The king of Greece said: nún jar hand wir dis ungemach "For nine years we have continued getriben dis schediliche spil. With this misery, this destructive game. minen sternenseher ich fragen wil, I wish to ask my fortune teller wie uns súlle geliogen How we might prevail.” den hies er fúr sich bringen. He had him brought out before him der kúng in fragen began. and the king began to question him. der meister sprach: heiten ir einen man, The master spoke: "If you had a man ist in Kriechen verborgen, who is hidden in Greece so nem ein ende úwer sorgen. then your troubles would come to an end. ich sag úch, wie es umb in lit. I’ll tell you how things stand with him. er ist verborgen in dire zit. He is hidden at this moment. mit früwenkleid ist bekleid sin lip. His body is clothed in women’s garments. sin múter ist so wis ein wip, His mother is so wise a woman daz si bekenet wol, that she well knows wie es im ergon sol: what awaits him: hie vor Troy erstorben to die here before Troy und öch do den pris erwerben. and thus win glory. von ir er gesalbet wart: He was anointed by her: kein woffen sneid nie so hart, no weapon ever cut so well daz in möchte versniden. that it could cut him. och tůt sy nicht vermiden, Nor did she forget si enpall in Schirone to send him to Chiron (der was halb ein ros, halb ein man), (he was half horse, half man); der lorte ir also schone he trained him very well schirmen, ringen, schiessen. in swordplay, wrestling and archery. múllistein, die si bergab liessen, Using his shield, he had to block die must er vahen uf den schilt. millstones that were rolled downhill. kúng, ob du den süchen wilt, King, if you wish to search for him, so sende us hundert oder mer, then send out a hundred or more men daz ieklicher sy ein kremer, each of them should be a merchant habe vielle, was fruwen gehort zu. and have many things for sale for women, eines er och tu: and he should also have on offer hab veile swert, messer, issengewant, swords, knives and armour. man sicht zehant It is obvious that wa er mit deu fruwen gat, although he [Achilles] is among the women, benamen er nicht enlat, he will not behave as one er beschüwe die kufmanschaft. if he sees the merchandise. also vint man den degen ellentbaft. In this way one will find the worthy warrior." der kúng volgte getrat The king immediately followed des wissen meisterg rat. the counsel of the wise master. er sant die botten uf die vart, He sent the messengers on the journey wand der also funden wart. and thus he [Achilles] was found in this way. also wart Achilles gon Troy brocht, So they brought Achilles to Troy mit im sin meister Schiron. with his master Chiron. usreit Ekttor, als er was gewon. Hector rode out as he was accustomed. do bekam im an der zit There and then he had his Achilles sin erster stritt,  first fight with Achilles, und triben daz den ganezen dag. and they fought the whole day. Ekttor ob mit krefftten lag. Hector was superior in strength. mocht er in han verschrotte, If he had been able to injure him, er het in geleit zu andren dotten.  he would have added him to the other dead. sust schied si die nacht. Thus the night parted them. was Achiles barnest dar bracht, Whatever armour Achilles had worn, daz hat er im von dem libegeslagen. Hector had cut it from his body. morndes ein núwen harnest mn sach tragen. In the morning he could be seen wearing new armour. so hub sich aber den ein stritt, Then, once more, a fight began. Ekttor twang in mit nid Hector pressed him with battle rage und mit so grosser krafft, and with such great force, daz er in dik macht flúchthafft. that he forced him to retreat. er treib in hin und denne har He drove him back and forth bis daz er alles daz von im geslüg, until he cut away all the armour daz er von harnest an im trůg. that he wore. also entweich danne Achilles. So Achilles took flight. Des morgens, do der dag har schein, In the morning, when the day dawned, Ektor reit us Troy allein Hector rode out from Troy alone mit grimem mut. in a grim mood. daz ungemach betwang den belt gut, Trouble burdened the good hero, wond by aller siner zit for in all his days, nie kein man mit strit no man had ever resisted sich sin bet erwert als lange. him as long in battle. daz was im angst und ange. Therefore, he was afraid and terrified. nu was öch Achilles bereit Now Achilles was ready too ze vyentlicher arbeit. For warlike endeavors. Ekttor sin zorn twang, His wrath subdued Hector daz der stritte mit wertte lang. so that the fight did not last long. Achilles sinen la schiit zerslug, Achilles hacked his shield to pieces daz er sin núczit dennen trug. so that he didn’t carry home a single piece of it. er slüg im so gros búllen He gave him such massive bruises umb die arm und umb die kúllen, on his arms and shoulders, Achilles kum von in endran. Achilles hardly escaped him. Ekttor schied öch von dan, Hector left the field too wond er múeden began. because he had begun to tire. doch schůff Achilles dem herr gemach, Achilles let the lord have a break, daz man sy zwene nur stritten sach. so that the two of them were not seen fighting anymore. Schiron fürt Achilles an ein heimlich stat. Chiron led Achilles to a secret place. mit dritten er im drat, With advice he counseled him wie er im solt tretten zü: how he should get at him: mit stichen also tú, namely with thrusting zwisseit swert und schilt. in between his sword and shield. ob du daz dün wilt, "If you can do so, hůwe im nach der bende, attack his hands: so nimt der strit ein ende. in this way, the fight will come to an end." do Ekttor kam gon Troy hinin, When Hector entered Troy, er sprach: wie trag daz sin? He said: “How can it be? min swert wil sin nút sndien! My sword cannot wound him. sol ich den strit nút miden, I cannot avoid the fight, des han ich iemer schande Since it would disgrace me forever. doch bereite er sich des morgens frü And so, he prepared himself early in the morning und grieff zu dem strit hinzu. and joined the fight. Achilles nam gen in den ker Achilles attacked him, und gedach an sins meisters ler. thinking of his teacher’s advice. damit er im daz leben angewan Thus, he took his life und schied frölich von dan. and left the field joyously. do die von Troy socheu Ektors val, When the people of Troy saw Hector’s death, in was gelege gar ir schall, their cheering died down, und trutten öch von recht and both lords and retainers bede herren und öch knecht. rightly mourned him. Ekttors gebot gebrochen wart; Hector’s order was disobeyed: man beslos die dor an der vart, The gates were closed at once, und wurdent beslossen hart and were locked securely und wol beseezt mit hůtte. and well-manned by guards. ein tor bevolhen wart herzogen Eneas, One gate was entrusted to Duke Aeneas damit er siner eren vergas. To make him forget his obligation. von frúeden gaebtte an daz dor Joyfully Chiron came to the gate Schiron und iesch ein kenpf davor. and called for a fight. daz leid Paris twang. Paris was overcome by grief. vir daz tor er do sprang He leapt in front of the gate uf Schyrones schaden gros. to Chiron’s great disadvantage. dem det er mit dem spies einen stos, He gave him a thrust with his lance daz im daz blitze mund und oren usflos. so that the blood flowed out of his mouth and ears. Schiron kertte die hindren fúesse dar, Chiron spun on his heels und slüg so krefftenklichen dar, and struck very strongly daz im entweich Paris. yet Paris dodged him. von im reit der degen wis The wise warrior rode away from him und kertte wider uf in in mit dem schaft and turned to him again with his spear und reit so mit grosser krafft. and rode at him with great force. uff dem schilt er im gehafft, He hit him on the shield und doch durchbrach der schafft, yet the spear went through daz Schiron tot beleib so that Chiron lay dead. Paris wider in die stat hin reit. Paris rode back into the city. do Achilles sach sins meisters dot, When Achilles saw his teacher’s death, sin herez leid von jomer not.  his heart suffered grief’s anguish. er gedach, wie er in móch gerechen  He considered how he might take revenge an Paris dem frechen. on the audacious Paris. er reit an daz tor, He rode to the gate. er sprach: wo ist Paris? ich beit sin bie vor. He said, “Where is Paris? I challenge him to come here.” kein antwurt im gegeben wart. He was given no answer. er kertte wider an die vart. He set off again. dis wart Paris geseit. This was told to Paris. er sprach: dis ist min höchstes leid. He said: "This is my greatest worry. von firchten mus ich in miden, Out of fear I have to avoid him. kein swert kan in doch sniden. No sword can cut him." do sprach ein wisser man: A wise man then said: herre, ich dich wol geleren kan. "Lord, I can certainly instruct you. niw einen kolben lang und gros. Take a long and hefty club. ja kan er nit dawider. Yes, he can’t defend himself against that. du slecht in dur nider, You must knock him down, und las in niemer uf, and never let him get up ubis daz sin kopff und huff until you have smashed his von dir wirt zerblúwen. head and skull. sin vart in licht mag geruwen. He might well regret his journey. nút hor uf, bís er dot gelige. Don’t stop until he is lying dead. also gewinest du, taz cr mit gesige. Thus you will accomplish it that he doesn’t win." Morndes, do es dagtte, In the morning when the dawn broke, Achilles an daz tor hin jagtte, Achilles rushed toward the gate. do was och hereit Paris There Paris was ready too, ze füs in ritterlicher wis. on foot in a knightly manner. mit sinem kolben, den er trug, With his club that he carried, uf sinen kopff er in do slug, he hit him there on the head, daz Achilles muste vallen. so that Achilles had to fall. úber in stund Paris mit schallen: Paris stood over him shouting: nút von hinan kum ich, “I’m not going to leave bis ich dot sche dich! until I see you dead!” Achilles verlor do de lip. Achilles lost his life. Paris kertte zu sinem wip. Paris returned to his wife. die was sins siges fro.  She was pleased about his victory dis gefügtte sich also. that had come about in this way. nun wurden die Kriechen in ein, Now the Greeks concluded Troyer kraft wer nun klein, that the Trojan strength was diminished sid Ekttor wer tot gelegen.  since Hector had been killed, sy woltten eines sturmes pflegen.  so they wanted to carry out an attack. alsus bercitte sich die schar The army therefore prepared itself mit starker wer dar, with heavy equipment und heiltten vor dem tor den strit and fought continuously before the gate und an der mur zu aller zit. and at the wall. Dis spil wertte einen ganezen tag, This game lasted a whole day daz nieman keiner ruwe pflag during which no one got any rest mit werffen und init schiessen, from throwing [spears], and from shooting arrows. daz blut sach man fliessen You could see the blood flowing von den Kriechen uf daz lant, from the Greeks into the earth. sinen lip verlor menig wigant. Many a hero lost his life. mit leittren woltten si stigen in. They [the Greeks] wanted to infiltrate with ladders. die inren liessens nút güt sin. The besieged didn’t let that happen. die nacht man sy scheiden sach. In the night you could see them retreating. die useren zugen an ir gemach. The attackers withdrew to their camp. den was die vart worden ze sur. Their attempt had soured. die inren behutten ir mur. The besieged guarded their wall. die Kriechen slichen wider her, The Greeks snuck back ob ieunan an der were wer. to see if someone was on watch. si fundens wol behut. They found it well guarded. daz ducht die Kriechen niendert gůt To the Greeks that did not seem good at all und sprachen: wir gewinen nicht also die stat. and they said: “We won’t take the city in this way.” ein heinlichen tag hat The Greeks and Aeneas die von Kriechen und Eneas. Had a secret meeting. er het in gelopt daz, He had promised them that er wollte sy lossen in he would let them in zu dem tor, des pfleger er soltte sin. through the gate that he was supposed to take care of. eins nachttes daz geschach, One night it so happened  daz man die Kriechen inbrechen sach. that the Greeks were seen breaking in. do ward erhaben ein hertter strit. Then a hard battle began der wertte vierzehen tag sid. which lasted fourteen days. bi des kúnges palas Close to the royal palace der strit an dem hersten was. the fighting was most fierce. Paris vacht mit maulicher kraft. Paris fought with manly force. er ward geschossen mit einem schaft, He was hit by an arrow daz er muste bliben tot. so that he had to die. erst hüb sich jomer and not. Now sorrow and wailing began. die stat ward angezúndet.  The city was set on fire. daz buch vir wor uns kúndet,  The book truly tells us daz die stat einhalb bran, that half of the city burned, in dem andren ort man in the other half one  erst in vierzhen tagen only heard after fourteen days vernam  als da cer strit sich endet hie, As the fight ended there, Elena vir iren vatter gie Helen went to her father und viel im ze füssen: and fell at his feet: vatter, ich wii búessen, "Father I want to atone, ich gib mich uf die gnade din! I surrender to your mercy! es was nút die schulde min, It was not my fault und bet es nút gedacht, and I didn’t intend daz ich soltte har sin bracht. to be brought here." Eneas mit driu tusing man Aeneas with three thousand men fur vou Troy in Ittalya dan, departed Troy for Italy. der kúng sin tochtter nam The king took his daughter und für von Troy And departed Troy mit grosser schoy to return to his land wider in sin lant, with great jubilation; da er starke geste vant: there he found many strangers: von Ungren der kúng rich, the powerful king of Hungary [was there]. der mit gewalt gar werlich He abducted Helen, the queen, Elena nam die kúngin by force of arms und fürtte si in daz rich sin and took her to his realm und behub si mit gewalt sider, and kept her there by force from that time onwards, wond si kam uiemerme hinwider. for she never came back. also endet dis getat, Thus ends this tale die von Troy geschriben stat. that is written of Troy.  = transcription  = translation     
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>This unusual account of the Trojan War - a cornerstone of Ancient Greek mythology, and one which was frequently retold and reimagined in the European Middle Ages - was discovered sandwiched in a compilation of different historical works, including excerpts from the chronicles of Rudolf von Ems and Jens des Enenkels and the latter part of the Repgau chronicle. Combining excerpts from different texts to produce a single narrative was a common practice in the Middle Ages, especially in the case of historical texts. Such compilations were often produced so that the text would better suit the needs of the patron - the person paying for the production of the book. Although the manuscript in which this text was found dates to the fifteenth century and offers historical information going up to 1350, the language of this poem indicates an earlier date of composition, probably in the thirteenth century.</p> <p>While today the most famous retelling of the Trojan War remains Homer's epic poem, the <em>Iliad </em>(composed c.1260-1180 BCE), this version was not well known to medieval Europeans, who instead got their knowledge of the legend from a variety of purportedly historical works. It is therefore unsurprising that this thirteenth-century poem was found in a history book. However, it diverges from the well-known story by casting the hero Aeneas as a traitor, and by massively condensing ten years of war and intrigue into just a few hundred lines. One open question is whether the poem was intended to be humorous - read it and judge for yourself!</p>
## Credits
Translated by Kathryn Starkey, Björn K. Buschbeck, Robert Forke, Mae Velloso-Lyons, Mareike Reisch,  and Kathleen Smith, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Mae Velloso-Lyons,  and Jordan Rosen-Kaplan
