---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  The Two Confessions | Dÿ zwu peicht
engtitle: |
  The Two Confessions
origtitle: |
  Dÿ zwu peicht
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/two_confessions"
redirect_from: /text/two-confessions
identifier: two_confessions.md
tei: /assets/tei/two_confessions.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/two_confessions.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [german]
periods: [15th_century]
textcollections: [gender-sex-sensuality, prank-or-be-pranked]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/two_confessions.jpg
thumb: /assets/img/text/two_confessions-thumb.jpg
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, cgm 714. [Public Domain]

 Dÿ zwu peicht The Two Confessions   Es was gar ain guter man There was once a good man. Der het ain frauen wol getha[n] He had an attractive wife. Die was im liep als sein leÿp She was as dear to him as his life Wann es was ein schönsz weÿp because she was a beautiful woman. Zu einer zeÿt er peÿ ÿr sasz Once he was sitting at her side In gutem mut on allen hasz in a good mood without misgivings. Do sie nu ain weil sassen in dem gute[n] mut When they been sitting a while in this good mood, Die frau sprach nu dünckt dich gut the wife said: “If you think it’s a good idea, So wil ich werlich peichten dir I will confess honestly to you Das du wider peichtest mir so that afterward you confess to me.” Er sprach frau das solsein He said: “Wife that shall be; Beÿ den rehten treuen mein I vow to do so faithfully. Du solt reht peÿhten mir You shall rightly confess to me Also wil ich auch dir and so I will likewise to you.” Dÿe frau sprach das sol sein The wife said: “This shall be. Das schwer ich auf dÿ treue mein This I swear to you on my honour.” Der man sprach nu sag mir an The husband said: “Now tell me, Hastu zu mir ÿendert kain[en] man did you have any man other than me? Die frau sprach treun ja ich The wife said: “Goodness me, yes. Des dorffs hirten willen thet ich I did the village shepherd’s will.” Do sprach zu ÿr der arm ma[n] Then the poor husband said to her, Warümb hastu das gethan “Why have you done this?” Die frau sprach ich tets ümb das The wife said: “I did it so that Das er uns icht würd gehasz he would not treat us ill Und uns der tzinsz liesz freÿ and not charge us the usual fee. Darümb lag ich ÿm peÿ That is why I lay with him.” Hastus gethan ümb das “If that is why you did it So pin ich dir nit gehas then I bear you no ill will.” Der man sprach nu sag an The husband said: ”Now tell me, Hastu süst keinen man did you have no other man?” Do sprach die frau seuberlich The wife said innocently: Lieber herr traun ja ich “Dear husband, goodness me, yes.” Do kom des herrn pot “When the lord’s messenger showed up, Da gieng ich zu im trot I went to him quickly. Er pat mich ümb die mÿnne mein He begged me for my love, Da thet ich auch den willen sein so I also did his will, Das er unsz nitFrom the context of the story, it is clear the scribe missed signalling a negation of the action. Hanns Fischer (1966) came to the same conclusion in his work. We have chosen to include the word “nit” (not) here in the transcript. vorm herrn ver redt so that he would not bad mouth us to the lord Und uns in seiner schirmung het and have us under his protection. Nu sih mein lieber man Now see, my dear husband, Darümb so hab ichs gethan that is why I did it.” Der man sprach hastus darümb getha[n] The husband said: “If that is why you did it So musz ich dich unverdacht lan then I must not blame you.” Der man sprach aber alls ee The husband asked her, as before, Ob sie het keinen mee if she had had any more. Joo sprach die frau wol gethan “Oh,” said the attractive wife, Der pfaff ist auch mein man “The priest is also my man.” Er sprach liebe fraue mein He said: “My dear wife, Warümb thustu den willen sein why do you do his will?” Ich thetz in keÿm argen nit “I did not do it out of spite, Neur das er got für uns pit but only so that he would plead with God for us.” Der man sprach iszs darümb geschehe[n] The husband said: “If that is why it happened So musz ich dirs aber über sehen then I have to overlook what you did.” Die frau sprach ich habs ÿe drüm than The wife said: “I have always done it for that reason Darümb scholtu mich unverdacht lan so you should not hold it against me.” Er fragt dÿ frauen aber wider He asked the wife yet again Ob sie keinen het gehabt sider if she had not had another since then. Sie sprach joo pisz mir nit gefer She said: “Oh, don’t be angry with me. Ich het auch den richter I also had the judge.” Eÿ sprach der arm man “Alas,” said the poor husband. Warümb hastu das gethan “Why did you do that?” Das thet ich ümb das “I did it so that Das er uns nicht wer gehas he would bear us no ill will, Und liesz uns des dienstz freÿ and release us from service. Darümb lag ich ÿm peÿ That is why I lay with him. Und thet es auch umb das And I also did it so that Ob uns ÿemant wer gehas if anyone bore ill will towards us, Der über uns thet clagen who brought a lawsuit against us, Und uns gen ÿm thet versagen and denounced us to him, Das du der pusz werst rfreÿIn the manuscript, what appears to be the letter “r” precedes the word “freÿ.” It was not crossed out by the scribe. We have included the letter “r,” and show it here crossed out. so that you would be absolved of blame.” Der man sprach das seÿ The husband said: “So be it. Nu sag liebe frau mir an Now tell me dear wife Hasztusz darümb gethan (if that is why you did it, So mag ich dirsz verdenken nicht then I can’t blame you for it), Ist es war ümb die geschicht is that the truth about why it happened?” Ja auff dÿ treue mein “Yes, on my honour, Ich thet es ümb den willn dein I did it for your sake.” Der man sprach sag liebe fraue mir The husband said: “Tell me dear wife, Schol ich schier pusz setzen dir shall I now set you your penance?” Die frau sprach wie pistu ain kalp The wife said: “How calf-like you are!To preserve source text imagery “wie pistu ain kalp” (how are you a calf) was translated as “how calf-like you are.” Ich hab kaum gepeichtet halp I have hardly confessed the half of it. Der kellner und des herrn koch The lord’s cellarer and his cook, Die kamen auch zu mir doch indeed they came to me too. Die prachten mir flaysch prot un[d] pir They brought me meat, bread and beer. Das gab ich auch offt dir I often gave that to you as well, Damit spart wir unser gut in order to save our own provisions. Darümb so hab nit pösen mut So don’t be angry Auff mich mein lieber man with me, my dear husband. Die peicht wirt schir ain end han The confession will soon be at an end. Wann wer sein sünd wil leichten Because whoever intends to lighten the burden of their sin, Der musz sein sund ÿe gar peühtenThis is a variant spelling of  “peichten.” they must always fully confess it. Ir ist kaum noch zwen There are only about two more, Als ich in meim synn kan verstën as far as I can tell. Der alltt hirt kam mir auch zu The old shepherd also came to me. Das was ainsz schmorgens fru It was early one morning Do ich das vih ausz traÿb when I was driving the cattle out Und verr da hinten plaÿb and I stayed behind out there. Do warff er mich ÿns gras Then he threw me into the grass Und thet mir was sein will was and did to me as he wished. Auff genad gethet ich das do I did that there out of mercy, Mein lieber wirt des glaub also believe me, my dear spouse. Das hüt gelt hab ich verricht I paid the tending fee Mit dem selbigen geschicht with this same act.” Nu sag an waÿstu icht mer “Now, do you have anything else to tell me?” Ja auff mein ër “Yes, on my honour, Unsers nachpern sun da peÿ our neighbours’ son; and the Bracht er frischer gesellen dreÿ three young companions he brought with him. Die haben gelob[t]This is a correction by the rubricator (the “t” was later inserted in red ink.) alle mir They all promised me Sie wollen sein peholffen dir They all promised me Ob dirsz gescheh ÿendert not If any adversity came upon you, So wollen [sy]This is a correction by the rubricator (the “sy” was later inserted in red ink.) that they would be willing to go to death with you. Sih das thet ich zu hilffe dir See? I did it to help you. Nicht lieber ma[n] verkers mir Dear husband, don’t hold it against me.” Do sprach der gut man Then the good man said: Wirt es icht schier ain e[n]d han “Will this ever have an end?” Sie sprach ja herr zu diser stund She said: “Yes husband, at this time Thu ich dir auch noch zwen kund I tell you of two more tidings. Zu mir kam der meszner The sacristan also Gegangen auch da her came over to me. Der hat auch mit mir gespilt He also played with me Damit ich sein huld pehielt so that I would keep his favour Das er mir dÿ kirch auff schlos and he would unlock the church for me Wenn ich wolt es ÿn nit verdros whenever I want without him getting annoyed. Für alle die in dem dorff sein For everyone who is in the village, Thut er auch den willen mein he also does my will. Des lonsz des geb wir nicht We don’t make any payment for this. Also hab ichs ver richt That’s how I’ve set it up. Wann es ist ain guter kneht Because he is a good lad, Er tet mirs dreu mal das ist sein reht he did it to me three times (that is his right) Und thet es gar schier dar and did it there quickly and right away, Das sein nyemant wurd gewar so that no one would know. Lieber man ich waÿsz nichtz dartzu Dear husband, I know nothing more. Setz mir darfür dy pusz nu Impose penance on me for this now. Nach genad des pit ich dich I ask you for mercy! Mit faszten nicht peschwer mich Don’t burden me with fasting, Mit peten und auch nit mit wache[n] with prayer or with keeping vigil, Noch süst mit andern sachen or with other things Wann ich pin ain kranckes weÿp because I am a weak woman Und hab einen schweren leÿp and have a heavy body." Er sprach mein liebs liep das sol sein He said: “My dear love, it shall be so Wann du pedenkst den frumen mein because you care about my welfare.” Er sprach nach genad setz ich dir He said: “I now impose on you, mercifully, Das scholtu fürwar glauben mir (you must truly believe me), Dir seÿ nu ain urkünd let it be announced to you Das du fürpas nÿmer thust sund that you must never, ever sin again. Von gots gewalt seÿ dir ver geben With God’s power may you now be forgiven. Nu pehallt die pusz gar eben Now keep away from sin as your penance.” Sie sprach nu sag an lieber man She said: “Now tell me, dear husband, Was sünd hastu gethan what sins have you committed?” Er sprach lieber peichtiger mein He said: “My dear confessor, Du scholt mir auch genedig sein you need to show me mercy too. Ich gieng mit unser maÿt auffs velt I went out to the field with our maid – Das seÿ dir in der peicht gemelt this is reported to you in confession. Do graÿff ich ÿr an dÿ hant Then I touched her hand Davon mir lust ward pekant and derived pleasure from this.” Sie sprach mit ungedult She said impatiently: Schlah ab dÿe hant für dÿ schult “Cut off your hand for this transgression!” Er sprach du hast gethan vil mer den[n] ich He said: “You have done much more than me Das über sach ich alles gütlich and I graciously overlooked it all.” Die frau sprach hastu doch wol v[er]nu[m]en The wife said: “But surely you understood Das ichs neur thet ümb unsern frume[n] that I only did it for our benefit. An deinem wir keinen frumen hanCrossed out by the rubricator (in red ink.) neme[n] Your action brought us no benefit. Ich müst mich gar ser schemen I would have to be very ashamed Das sie scholt mein frau sein to have her as my lady, Die selb pösz pfüllstosserein that common filthy tramp.The translators were unable to find another attestation of this vivid word which consists of three parts: pfüll which means filth; stosser which means tramp, and the ein which is the feminine ending. Bin ich nit vil schöner denn ich sie Am I not much fairer than she is? Das pekenn du selber hie Admit it right now!” Joo du liebe fraue mein “Oh yes, you, my dear lady. Du pist gegen ÿr ain kaÿserein You are an empress next to her!” Sie sprach“Sprach” added to the text. It follows the convention the scribe has used to introduce speech. warümb hastus denn gethan She said: “Then why did you do it, Du rehter schnöder pöser man you truly lowdown, vile man?” Er sprach ich thets on allen arge[n] lÿst He said: “My intentions were not evil. Wann du mir süst laÿder gram pist I did it because you are usually so cross with me.” Wie möcht ich euch holt gesein “How could I possibly be well disposed to you Wenn ÿr so schier ver gesztt mein when you forget me so quickly? Wist ich kan euch nit ver geben Know this! I cannot forgive you Die grossen sünd das merckt eben these grave sins, mark my words! Gee hin gen Rom pald und trot Go to Rome soon and get there quickly, Ümb die selben missetot because of this misdeed. Ir habt geprochen eur ee You have broken your marriage vows. Ich glaub euch fürpas nÿmer mee I can’t believe a word you say anymore!” Er sprach frau thu sein nicht He said: “Lady, don’t do this! Es wer mÿr gar ain schwer geschicht It would be very difficult for me. Ich wils peÿ meinen treuen jehen I will swear on my honour Es schol dir nÿmer mer not geschehen that you shall never be in distress again. Thu mir genad des pit ich dich Show me mercy, I beg you! Ich han dirs auch gethan sicherlich I have surely shown it to you.” Sie sprach nain es mag nit gesein She said: “No, it cannot be. Du must darümb leÿden dÿ pein You have to suffer the consequences.” Genad liebe fraue mein “Mercy, my dear lady! Was du wilt das musz sein Your will shall be done.” Sie sprach für das creutz leg dich dÿmütigklich She said: “Lie down before the cross humbly Nacket so wil ich mit gerten schlahe[n] dich and naked and I shall beat you with a switch!” Er sprach auf genad knie ich für dich He said: “I kneel before you begging for mercy! Und schlach und rauff und mörde mich Go ahead, beat and whip and murder me, Seÿt es nit anders mag gesein since it cannot be otherwise. Es laÿd Jhesus auch für dÿ sünde mein Jesus suffered for my sins too.” Sie sprach wol hin mein lieber kneht She said: “Well then, my dear fellow, Die genad ist pesser denn das got reht mercy is better than justice. Vor got sey dir ver geben Before God, you are forgiven. Hallt fürpas pas dein leben eelichs lebe[n] Lead your marital life better Wenn du pis her hast gethan than you have done thus far, So will ich dir abschlahen den pan and I shall lift your excommunication. In gotes namen alsus In God’s name thus O filius et spiritus sanctus o filius et spiritus sanctus.” 
 
## Introduction to the Source 
<p><em>The Two Confessions</em> survives in five manuscripts dating from the fourteenth to the mid-fifteenth century: Berlin, Staatsbibliothek Preuβischer Kulturbesitz, Ms. germ. oct. 1430 (B), Karlsruhe, Badische Landesbibliothek, Karlsruhe 408 (K), Donaueschingen 104, (Do), Vienna (Österreichische Nationalbibliothek, Cod. 3027 (W), and Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, cgm 714 (M), which is the text transcribed and translated here.</p> <p><meta charset="utf-8" /></p> <p dir="ltr">Because the versions of <em>The Two Confessions</em> in these five manuscripts differ to varying degrees from one another, scholars have divided them into two distinct groupings:<em> Die zwei Beichten A</em> (versions Do, K, W, and B) and <em>Die zwei Beichten B</em> (version M). Version M, the one presented here, is distinct in its setting, the role of the spouses, the number of lovers and the reason for the affairs. In <em>Die Zwei Beichten A</em>, the story is set at Easter. The couple is snowed in, preventing them from doing their yearly confession to a priest, which prompts the husband to suggest they confess to each other. This setting is absent in M, where the wife proposes the confession time while sitting at the fire. In M, the story ends with the wife taking on the role of the priest and, after a tongue-lashing, granting the husband absolution, whereas in the other versions the husband gets beaten with a broom. In some versions (Do and K), the story ends with a moral, either asking God to shame “false wives” (Do) or advising husbands not to ask questions of their wives that they don’t want to know the answer to (K). The number of lovers in M is high (12) as compared to Do (4) and K (5), but not as high as in version W (21). However, the motivation for having slept with them in M is only economical; in the other versions there are a variety of reasons besides economical gain: violence, lust, pity.</p> <p dir="ltr"><em>Die zwei Beichten </em>is titled <em>Dÿ zwu peicht</em> and appears in cgm 714, on fol. 431r-441v, which is housed in the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek München (Bavarian State Library in Munich). With its 204 lines, it is one of the longer versions of this tale. The manuscript is dated to the third quarter of the 15th century and was written in Nordbairisch (a North-Bavarian variety of Middle High German) on paper. Cgm 714 is a compilation manuscript that contains rhymed couplet texts largely belonging to the genres of  Minnerede (texts about love), Mären (comic tales) and Fastnachtsspiele (carnival plays).</p>
## Introduction to the Text 
<p><meta charset="utf-8" /><em>The Two Confessions (Dÿ zwu peicht)</em> is an anonymously written story of which the oldest version dates from the second quarter of the 14th century. The manuscript on which this edition and translation are based was composed in the third quarter of the fifteenth century in the region of Northern Bavaria. The story belongs to the genre of “Märe”, i.e. stories handed down anonymously, shaped by literary conventions, aimed at entertainment and without any higher rhetorical, religious or critical claims. </p> <p dir="ltr">Some context concerning religious practice is in order here. Confession is a sacrament most frequently associated with the Christian faith of Catholicism. In confession, the believer confesses their sins anonymously to a priest, who as an ordained representative of God has the authority to absolve sin and assign penance. In the late Middle Ages, the sacrament of confession worked somewhat differently than in modern Catholicism. It was not anonymous, took place less frequently, and there was a kind of “emergency provision” for confessing to a lay person (someone who is not clergy). It is also worth noting that in the Middle Ages, priests were always men. </p> <p dir="ltr"><em>The Two Confessions</em> tells the story of a husband and wife who decide to confess their sins to one another. The wife initiates the process and is the first to confess; her husband’s question of whether she has had any other man leads her to confess to having slept with a total of twelve men in the village: the young shepherd, the lord’s messenger, the priest, the judge, the cellarer, the lord’s cook, the old shepherd, the neighbour’s son and three of his companions, and finally the sacristan. Against the husband’s complaints about her infidelity, the wife explains that each affair was to the advantage of their household: sleeping with the shepherd was in lieu of making the traditional small payment for services, the lord’s messenger will take them under his protection, the cellarer and the cook provide them with food and drink, and so on. Accepting his wife’s reasoning, the husband forgives her, and it is then his turn to confess. The husband confesses to having taken pleasure from touching their maid’s hand while they were on the field together. For this, the wife demands as penance that he cut off his hand and undertake a pilgrimage to Rome. She argues that her actions were borne out of wanting to provide for their household and good standing, whereas his indiscretion was purely out of lust for the maid. The husband pleads with his wife for mercy, until she instructs him to lead his life more truthfully going forward and then, assuming the role traditionally reserved for a male priest, uses Latin to absolve him of sin.</p> <p>The modern reader may appreciate the entertaining and comical depiction of married life in the German Middle Ages through reading <em>The Two Confessions</em>. The story is quite literally a “he said, she said”: a man and a woman offer contradictory explanations of the same event with the reader being presented only with the spoken exchange and no kind of description. This simplistic yet direct style draws in readers, who might find themselves impressed by the extravagance of the wife’s confession and her subsequent furor at her husband having touched the maid’s hand. Gender, power, and the hierarchy of German society in the late Middle Ages all interrelate with each other in <em>The Two Confessions</em>.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>“Die zwei Beichten A.” <em>Deutsche Versnovellistick des 13. bis 15. Jahrhunderts</em>, edited by Klaus Ridder and Hans-Joachim Ziegeler, Schwabe Verlag, 2020, pp. 112–30.</p> <p dir="ltr"><a href="https://books.google.ca/books?id=fuYfAQAAIAAJ">Fischer, Hanns. <em>Die deutsche Märendichtung des 15. Jahrhunderts.</em> Münchener Texte und Untersuchungen zur Deutschen Literatur des Mittelalters, Beck, 1966.</a></p> <p dir="ltr">Rasmussen, Ann Marie. “Gender und Subjektivität im Märe die zwei Beichten (A und B).” <em>Inszenierungen von Subjektivität in der Literatur des Mittlealters</em>, edited by Martin Baisch, Jutta Eming, Hendrikje Haufe, and Andrea Sieber, Ulrike Helmer Verlag, 2005, pp. 271–87.</p> <p dir="ltr"><a href="http://daten.digitale-sammlungen.de/0010/bsb00106375/images/index.html?id=00106375&groesser=&fip=193.174.98.30&no=&seite=81">Schneider, Karin. <em>Die deutschen Handschriften der Bayerischen Staatsbibliothek München: cgm 691-867</em>, Otto Harrassowitz, 1984, pp. 79–89</a>.</p> <p dir="ltr">Schröder, Werner. “Die zwei Beichten A und die zwei Beichten B.” <em>Die deutsche Literatur des Mittelalters. Verfasserlexikon</em>, 2nd ed., Verfasserlexikon 10. Berlin, 1977, pp. 1615–17.</p>
## Credits
Transcription by Margreet De Rooij, Eva Dirschka, Matthieu Martin, Elizabeth Milne, Nina Profazi, and Myrto Provida, Translation by Margreet De Rooij, Eva Dirschka, Matthieu Martin, Elizabeth Milne, Nina Profazi, and Myrto Provida, Introduction by Margreet De Rooij, Eva Dirschka, Matthieu Martin, Elizabeth Milne, Nina Profazi, and Myrto Provida, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Dante Zhu
