---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  Vorau Plaint of Sin | Vorauer Sündenklage
engtitle: |
  Vorau Plaint of Sin
origtitle: |
  Vorauer Sündenklage
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/vorau_plaint_sin"
redirect_from: /text/vorau-plaint-sin
identifier: vorau_plaint_sin.md
tei: /assets/tei/vorau_plaint_sin.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/vorau_plaint_sin.pdf
textauthor: Anonymous
languages: [german]
periods: [12th_century]
textcollections: [prayer-spirituality]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/vorau_plaint_sin.png
thumb: /assets/img/text/vorau_plaint_sin-thumb.png
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Drawing of the Tree of Virtues, flanked by angels, with Love at the top with an image of Christ blessing, illustrating epistle IV.1; "Tree of Virtues" from British Library Arundel 44, f.13r. [Public Domain]

     Domine labia mea aperies Domine, labia mea aperies! nu gestade herre mir des O Lord, grant me this, daz ich din lop gesprechen mege that I may speak your praise. minen munt insliuz unde phlege Open my mouth and guide der werche miner zunge the works of my tongue, daz ich dich bitten kunne so that I may pray to you. daz gib du mir heiliger crist Grant this to me, holy Christ! Sancte Maria du da bist Holy Mary, you who are wareu muoter, reiniu maget the true mother, the pure maiden, zu miner helue wis geladet be invited to my aid! Ich han uon minen sulden Because of my sins des oberisten hulde I have lost, so gravely, uerlorn also harte the love of the highest. durch willen der worte In the name of the words der dir der engel zu sprach that the angel spoke to you do er dir die heren botscaft when he first delivered to you aller erist kundet uon gote the most glorious message from God, nu wis huote ein bote you should today be a messenger an dinen ein bron sun to your only son, an unseren herren to our Lord, an der waren heilant to the true saviour, der allez manchunne enbant who freed all mankind, drut frouwe mit dire dear Lady, with you! zu sinen hulden hilf du mir Help me gain his love durch willen der geburde in the name of his birth – her in diser werlt geborn born here in this world. harte uorhte ich sinen zorn I fear his anger greatly, wande ich mih sculdigen weiz for I know that I am guilty. nu biuilhe ich fruowe minen geist Now, Lady, I give my spirit to you zu helue wariu maget for help, O true maiden. allez daz si dir gechlaget Everything shall be bewailed to you daz mir iemer gewerre that has ever happened to me. ia gedrwe ich dir uerre Yes, I trust you completely.  Himelisgiu chuniginne Queen of heaven, wie uerre ich andich dinge what great hope I have in you daz heil miner sele for the salvation of my soul, durch willen der eren in the name of the honour der dir got des tages irbot that God accorded to you on that day do er durch aller suntære not when he, for the sake of the suffering of all sinners, in dinen reine buch cham entered your pure womb. zeiner muoter er dich nam He chose you as a mother uzzer allen wiben over all other women. ze sele unde ze libe I place both soul and body getriwe ich uil wol dir in your hands in great trust. ein bote wis hiude mir Be a messenger today for me an den hiligen crist to the Holy Christ! ein teil du mirs sculdig bist You are partly responsible  daz du mir heluest umbe got for helping me reach God,  wande du den ewigen lop because you have received eternal praise  durch die sundere inphienge due to sinners. unde newere nie nieman For if no-one had ever  mit sunden beuangen been caught by sin so wær iz unergagen then that which God has done  daz got mit dir getan hat with you would not have happened. nu suche ich armer dinen rat Now I, poor man, seek your guidance, diner helue ist mir not I need your help. durch den heiligen tot In the name of the sacred death den der ware gotesun that the true son of God an deme heren cruce nam took on the glorious cross durch allez daz manneschunne for all of mankind, nu uertilige mine sunde cleanse me of my sins unde heile miner sele and heal my soul! die hulde mines herren Help me regain di hilf du mir gewinnen the love of my Lord – duo gotes gebererinne you, who bore God, nune la mih under wegen niht do not let me go under! uon dir daz ewige liht It is thanks to you that eternal light uber alle dise werlt ir scin shines out over all the world! nu hilf mir sundere heim So help me, a sinner, come home uz diseme wurmgarten from this garden of snakes da wir ingeworfen wurden that we were thrown into durh adames missetat because of Adam’s crime:i.e. eating the forbidden apple. der allez manne chunne hat he, who upon mankind ir woruen michel arbeit has brought great suffering mit siner chelgitechheit through his greed. Nuo hore du urouwe minen ruof Lady, hear my call! dich da got zuo diu gescuof For God created you for this purpose e ich ie wurde – long before I was born – daz du die burde that you might bear the burden  di er uof sich nam with him do ir in dise werlt cham that he took upon himself mit samt ime huobest when he came into this world. in dinen buche duo intruogest You carried him in your womb, maget wesende, du in geberest you bore him, still a maiden, sin chint amme du werest you were his wet nurse, zu dem uronen sale, du in brehdest you brought him to the temple, windelline du ime gedahtest you wrapped him in swaddling clothes. do du in inphienge When you received him, muterlichen du in begienge you met him in a motherly way, an dinen brusten du in zuoge you took him to your breast, in egyptum duo mit im fluohe you fled with him into Egypt. do du diu werch mit im worhtest When you undertook these acts with him, mit im worhtest [undertook with him] wie harte du sin do uorhtest how frightened you were for him! gedruobet du an im diche wurde You were often very worried about him, do hulue du im die burde when you helped him wol tragen mit uollen carry his burden well and gladly, maget umbe wollen O immaculate maiden. Uil harte truoge du die burde You bore a heavy burden, do du daz din chint when you saw your child an dem uronen cruce sahe hangen hanging on the blessed cross. do weiz dir irgangen What happened to you then also der wissage sprach was as the prophet spoke, do er uil uerre hiebeuor sach when, long before, he foresaw den dinen michelen lop the great praise you would have unde al daz | der ware got and all those things that the true God mit dir tuon wolde would do with you. er sprach daz ein sterne solde He said that a star uon dem herren iacobe chome would come from the blessed Jacob da uone wurdest duo urouwe uernomen – this meant you, Lady – dennen wurde ein chint geborn from which a child would be born des ser solde durch uaren which would pierce maget dine sele your soul, maiden. iz solde wesen herre It would become Lord uber elliu diu riche over all kingdoms. er sah iz wærlichen He saw it truly: do daz also ir gie when it happened to you thus, daz man dinen sun hie that he was called your son, do ware mit sere then, with pain din heiligiu sele your holy soul uil harte beuangen was gripped most terribly. er mahtich uon dannen From this he was well able zuo deme sternen wole zelen to count you among the stars, wande dich got selbe zu dem liehte wolde erwelen for God himself chose you to be the light daz uns da sol wisen to show us the way zu deme uronen paradyse to the blessed paradise. Also der mer sterne You are like the star of the sea, den scefman leuet uerre which shows the sailor the way uber genen breiden se far across the wide sea; uns tet diu uinstre da beuor we the former darkness brought us pain – do du maget do irscine but when you, maiden, shone out do was diu sorge hine this suffering was gone, do was druren gestoret grief was banished, vroude irhoret joy resounded uon den engelen hie in erde here on earth from the angels. uil salich du do wurde It is a great blessing that you her indise werlt geborn were born here on earth, wande aller der zorn for all the anger unde elleu diu uientscaft and all the enmity diu under mennisken unt under gote was which existed between men and God, mit dir zu suone hat braht was reconciled through you. uone diu so han ich mir gedaht Because of this I thought daz ich alles mines scaden that I, with all my misdeeds, zuo dir fluht welle haben should flee to you. Vrouw uber allez daz dir ist Lady, greatest of all the things dich der heilige crist that the holy Christ des wirdich hat bedaht has bestowed upon you daz du lop hast braht is that you have brought praise uber alle dise erde to all the earth. no solt du gote werde Now, worthy child of God, mine dige irhoren hear my prayer! du da zu den niun choren For to the nine choirsIn Christian thought, the angels are typically divided into nine groups, or choirs. michele urouwede hast gegeben you have brought great joy, den boten, unde den wissagen and to the apostles and to the prophets, unde den martereren and to the martyrs, den bihteren, also heren to the blessed confessors unt patriarchen and the patriarchsi.e. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. mit dinen starchen werchen with your great deeds. die hast du gezieret You have adorned them unde hast die mandunge braht and have brought joy. uil manich sele hiut hat Now, many souls gedingen in der helle in hell hope daz in der behwelle that, in hell, uon dinen werchen werde rat they will be helped through your deeds. got mit dir zebrochen hat Through you, God broke down di uesten helleporten the mighty gates of hell. mit gedanchen unde mit worten Neither in thoughts nor in words, noch mit cheiner slahte dinge nor in any other way, so ne chan ich uuore bringen can I express di guote di an dir sint the goodness that you have. du bist des obristen kint You are the child of the highest unde bist doch sin muoter and yet are also his mother. uone diu so tut er vrouwe  Because of this, lady, he does allez daz duo wil all you wish. nun ist miner sunden nie so uil My sins are not so great siner guote nesi mere that his goodness is not greater. ich bite dich durch sine ere I pray to you in the name of his honour daz du ledegest [minen geist to free my spirit, den du in angesten weist]  which you find in a state of fear.The passage in square brackets is inserted in the top margin of the manuscript (in the same hand). Nuo bete ich dich gerne I reach for you gladly, vrouwe uil uerre most distant Lady, want ich wærlichen weiz for I know it truly, wil du ledegen minen geist that if you wish to free my spirit, der mir da ist benomen which is shut away from me, so solt du mir zehelue chomen then you will come to my aid swenne ich disen lip urende when my life comes to an end. des bite ich dich durch willen der urstende I ask you this in the name of the resurrection der der tæte uon deme grabe that he carried out from his grave – der dich da zuo gesezet habe he, who placed you on high zu frouwen uber elleu dinch above all women, in all things, dem wole kunt sint and to whom all my sorrows alle mine sorgen are well known. ich newas ich zu niht worden I had become nothing daz was mir ungewizzen and was unaware. got hete sich geulizzen God strove wi er mohte gezieren unde geren to adorn and honour mine sele unde minen lip my soul and my body, unt han ich mich des selbe sit but I let myself also harte uerstozen fall completely. er wolde mich genozen He wanted me to be a companion den engelen in den hohen of the angels on high, uber die nuon chore above the nine choirs  wolde er mich sezen he wanted to raise me. daz mich des iht mege lezen Queen,i.e. the Virgin Mary.ensure daz bewar du chunniginne that these things are still open to me, durch der wile willen in the name of the moment daz dir got ie chunt wart when God made himself known to you. nu offene mir die wider wart Open up a path of return for me, denn ich her uerheret si so that I may be in glory there. drut frouwe nuo stant mir bi Dear Lady, stand by me, alsich dir des wol getruwe for I trust you in this. wi ungerne ich nu buwe How I now dislike living diz uinster lant in this dark land! zeinem boten wis du mir gesant You were sent to me to be a messenger an den der da wol mach to him, who is well able mir geben den ewigen tach to give me eternal day, daz er mich uuore hinnen by bringing me from this place sciere dar bringe quickly to that place,i.e. from earth to heaven. da ich habe liep an leit where I might have love without suffering froude an arbeit joy without travail, da ich mich iemer mere mende where I might rejoice for ever more, ewiclichen an ende eternally, without end, mit allen den die der gotes chint with all those who have become the children of God mit dinen werchen worden sint through their works. Vrouwe uolliu guotes Lady full of goodness, durh willen des bludes in the name of the blood daz got an dem cruce uz goz that God shed on the cross, unde durch willen des wazeres daz uon siner siten floz and in the name of the water that flowed from his side, gemisket mit drore mixed with blood, nu uernim mich suntere listen to me, a sinner, unde hilf mir daz ich uon deme tiuuele werde enbunden and help me become unbound from the devil, durch willen der uinf wunden in the name of the five wounds der got duch unsich irliten haben that God suffered for our sake, unt durch willen aller der tage and in the name of all the days die er uon | dir getragen wurde in which he was carried by you, unde durch willen diner uferte and in the name of the ascension die du ze himele tete that you made into heaven. nu hilf mir uz dirre note Help me out of this torment, uz disen ubelen woftale out of this evil valley of pain, unde brinch mich zu deme uronen sale and bring me to the church da got den ewigen lon git where God gives eternal reward. nu ledige chunigin inzit Queen, free at this very moment mine uil arme sele my most pitiful soul, durch des grabes ere in the name of the honour of the grave da der uil salige inne lach in which the most sacred man lay, der sinen lip umbe unsich gap who gave up his life for our sake. Nu hilf mir heilbringe Help me, bringer of salvation, wariu uogedinne true Queen aller der uerherten of all the blessed, die diniu werch nerten who are healed by your works. du brehte in die wider uart You brought them a path of return, mit dir diu uinstere wart through you was darkness zu dem liehte uerwandelot transformed into light, mit dir der ewige tot through you the eternal death aller wart zestoret of all men was destroyed, uon dir wart irhoret through you resounded in der helle mandunge joy in hell,  mit dir wart gewunnen through you was won an deme divuele sin ueste the fortress of the devil. aller magde beste Best of all maidens, uon rehte man dich bitten scol it is right that we should pray to you! mit dir der Adames ual Through you Adam’s fall wart braht zuo guode was turned to good, mit dir wart diu huote  through you protection allen mennisken gegeben was given to all mankind, daz ir die engele sulen phlegen for whom the angels must care for beidv naht unde tach both night and day. uil wil du nu heizen maht It is proper that you are called porta paradyses porta paradyses,The poet uses Latin here, which he translates into German in the following line. tuore des himelriches the gate of heaven, muoter des heiles mother of salvation, tilegerinne alles leides banisher of all sorrow. aller gute bistu uol You are full of goodness, din gnade diu sol may your mercy mich ledegen, uon miner meile set me free from my pain, durch willen der reinen in the name of the purity der ime got selbenne behielt an dir that God himself maintained in you. nu hilf trut frouwe mir Help me, dear Lady, unde habe irbarmede uber mich and have mercy upon me. des bitte ich armer minniske dich I, a poor man, pray to you for this, durch willen der note in the name of the suffering der daz herze dines sunes an dem cruce hete of your son’s heart on the cross,  do erhangende darane toute when, hanging from it, he met death, unde durch willen aller der werche da er dich ie mite fruote and in the name of all the deeds through which he ever made you joyful: so hilf mir armen umbe got help me, poor man, come to God, diu wort diu er selbe chot those words, that he himself spoke, daz er diu an mir bewere let him grant them in my case: er sprach nine wolde tot der sundare he said, he wished for the death of no sinners. Scephære aller dinge Creator of all things, nu uernim mine stimme hear my voice! durch sande peteres willen In the name of St Peter, der durch dine minne who, for the sake of your love, an daz breit mere trat walked on the wide sea, durch die liebe daz er dich gerne gesach because his love made him desire to see you, so uernim herre mine gebete listen to my prayer, Lord. allez daz ich ie getete All that I have ever done wider dinen hulden contrary to your love – des wil ich mich suldigen I wish to confess my guilt for these things zu dinen gnaden geben and give myself to your mercy, unde wil dir rihten unze ich lebe and I wish to turn towards you for as long as I live. ob du nu ruochest min If you grant this to me, so sol ich ein riwesere sin I will be a contrite man unze an minen ende until I die. nu solt du mir senden Send me dinen heiligen geist your Holy Spirit! wande du herre uil wol weist For you know full well, Lord, daz elliu miniu dinch  that all of my efforts ane dine helue inwiht sint are nothing without your help. nu ledige herre mir diu bant So, Lord, untie the bands da mide mich der ubele ualant with which the evil enemy hat gebunde so diche has bound me so tightly. uon sinen manegen strichen From his manifold traps moht ich mich niht behuoten I am unable to protect myself, mir newellen heluen dine guote unless your goodness helps me. Got duo solt mich alle zit bewaren God, you should care for me at all times, daz ich rehte geuare so that I take the right path – des bit ich dich herre I ask this of you, Lord, durch des ganges ere in the name of the honour of the journey den du zu dem cruce gienge that you took to the cross, do dich di iuden hiengen when the Jews hanged you, unde durch willen der geburte and in the name of your birth, daz du geborn wurde when you were born durch allez mankunne for all mankind. nu uergip mir mine sunde So forgive me my sins, du uil heiliger crist most holy Christ! duo daz eine bist You are the one wider den ich gesundet han against whom I have sinned, deme ich ouch in rede sol gan and to whom I must also speak, der mir ouch urteilen sol who will also judge me den minen freislichen ual and correct sol bringen zerehte my terrible fall. nu hilf dinem chnete So help your servant durch dinen heiligen tot in the name of your holy death: des ist mir durft not this is my urgent need. Uarre got der getruwe True and faithful God, nu mich mine sunde riuwen I repent my sins unde si ouch gerne buozen welle and desire to do penance for them. nu habe irbarmede uber mich So have mercy upon me! des bite ich armer menske dich I, a poor man, ask this of you, durch aller heiligen ere in the name of the honour of all saints. nu hilf mir daz ich mine sele Help me to inphure uon deme bechen release my soul from torment! uber den lip solt du daz rechen You must judge my body, der ist suldich wider dich which has sinned against you. da mit wil ich With it, I would like dir uil gerne gelten very dearly, to pay recompense daz ich dir so selten for having so seldom han gelonet mir gute rewarded you with goodness daz du mich mit dinem bluote for the fact that you, with your blood, chouftest uon der helle bought me from hell unde uon der heizen bechwelle and from the burning pit. swa ich des uergezzen han Whenever I forgot to do this da han ich uerre getan I caused great damage wider [widere] mineme heile to my salvation. da wil ich mir selbe umbe irteilen I therefore wish to give myself den dinen michelen gerich to your mighty judgement, in diseme libe uber mich so you may judge me in this life. daz mir drort zeleide solde werden That I might endure pain in the other place –I.e. in hell. daz irteile ich ungerne I would not like to grant myself that. daz wurde | lihte zelenge It would surely seem too long, dize genimet sciere ende but it would quickly come to an end daz du mich sin hier ingaltestest if you were to punish me here unde du den geist behaltest and keep my spirit – des sist du herre iemer gelobet for this, Lord, you will always be praised! ich was irtoret unde irtobet I was a mindless fool daz ich des ie uergaz each time I forgot you, der da scephære was you who created uber himel unde uber erde both heaven and earth. daz er ruhte werden That you manifested yourself ein armer menniske durh mich as a poor man for my sake – owe war dahte ich alas, what was I thinking,   daz ich niht enzit uof ensach when I failed to consider you at all times? disiu werlt hat mirre zeiget daz This world has shown me wi ir lon ist getan what sort of reward it offers. daz ir ir so uil gedienet han God must have mercy upon me daz muoze got erbarmen for serving the world so much.  si betruget manegen armen The world has deceived many a poor man eler wanen daz riche si who believes he is rich, er gelit zeiungest der bi which eventually causes him to suffer  uil harte erbarmiclichen very pitifully. nach deme ewigen riche All who are in this condition weruen nu alle die der sin should strive for the eternal realm, daz ist hinen uurder der rat min this is my advice from now on. daz ist stæte unde guot This is steadfast and good. owi wi boslich er tuot Alas, how badly that man behaves der iz niene chophet é who buys none of this é, der marchet zege before the market to do so is gone. ime chumt hernach daz zit Later, the time will come, é sin sele begebe den lip before his soul relinquishes his body, ob elleu div werlt sin eigen wære when, even if he owns the whole world, daz er si gerne gæbe he would gladly give it away truwet ers iht geniezen if he believed he might be saved. daz er den lip lieze If he were to leave his body zebuluer uerbrennen and burn to powder – iz ist enwiht denne then that is the end of him. den der tiuvel so betrivget He whom the devil deceives thus, dem hat er daz halmel uor gezogen making him put it [his confession] off, dem hat er daz halmel uor gezogen that man is denied a helmet with which to defend himself, unz er ingar hat betrogen until he is entirely deceived. Got der gewære True God, nu uernim mich sundære listen to me, a sinner! nu lig ich in dirre tieffe I lie in the depths, an dine guote ich nu ruofe absent from your goodness, and beg you daz du mir bietest dine hant to offer me your hand. ez ist leider uil lanch It was, alas, a long time ago daz ich flos dine hulde that I lost your love. sich huoben mine sulde My sins began des tages do adam on the day Adam dir wart ungehorsam disobeyed you – do viel ich in daz unreht then I fell into wrongdoing. daz han ich sundiger chneht I, a sinful knave, sit uil diche giteniuwet have been greedy ever since. des bivte ich mine riuwe I offer my repentance for this zu dinen gnaden to your mercy: nu solt du mich inphahen may you take me in! durch necheine mine missetat Through no misdeed of mine disiv werlt mich betrogen hat this world has deceived me. si hat mir armen getan It treated me, poor man, also wil manegem man like many other men den sie hat beswichen whom it has tricked. ein teil han ich irite harte [ge] gehenget At times I clung to it too closely, ich uorte ich habe gelenget I feared I had misguided die gnist miner sele the salvation of my soul. gnedger herre Merciful Lord, nu mich dir erbarmen have pity upon me, ia choufest du mihc armen for you bought me, a poor man, mit din selbes bluote with your own blood. warre got durch dine guote True God, in your goodness, nu uernim riuwigen mich listen to me, a penitent man. ich wil mich ruogen wider dich I wish to confess to you. ich binz der wirsiste man I am the worst man der den name ie gewan who ever obtained the name daz er cristen solde sin of Christian. nu la du zorn din Do not let your anger uber mich uerworhten niht dan fall upon me, a man in sin, dar nah unde ich daz garnet han as a result – although I have deserved it – so wære ich ewichlichen ulorn for then I would be lost for eternity. in den sunden wart ich geborn I was born in sin, mit sunden mich diu muoter enphie my mother conceived me in sin, die ich auer in der toufe lie which I then set aside in baptism, da gehiez ich cristenlichiu dinch when I committed myself to Christianity, diu han ich gare erlogen sint which I have since completely denied. Anediger herre Merciful Lord, nu uorhte ich mir sere I am very frightened! want ich mich suldigen weiz For I know I am guilty. aller dinge ich mich uleiz All things in which I was diligent diu waren wider dir were contrary to you – die solt du uergeben mir you should forgive me these things durch miner muoter willen in the name of your mother’s wishes. mine sulde sint niht ringe My guilt is not small, ir ist laider so uil alas, it is so great! ein tail ich dir nu clagen wil I now want to bewail some of it to you, der ich nu gehugen mach which I can remember at the moment. unde sezze ich naht unde tach And even if I sat day and night, sone dorft ich niemer gedagen I would never fall silent ob ich allez solde sagen if I were to speak of all of it. wande ich uie dar zuo For I took to sin leider uil fruo very early, alas. do ich in der wigen lach When I lay in my cradle, done uerliez ich nie nieneiheinen tach there was no day when I did not fail ine getrupte mine muter to plague my mother. ich tete ir luze guotes I was rarely good to her, ich nete ir niwar leit I only caused her suffering. uil manege bosheit Since then I have committed han ich sit begangen many bad deeds: min lip was beuangen my body was consumed mit alles achuste by all kinds of wickedness, under minen brusten and in my breast so newas niuwar zorn unde nit there was nothing other than anger and envy, untriuwe unde uber muote disloyalty and pride. aller unguote My heart was always full was min herze ie uol of all kinds of wickedness, rehter dinge weiz hol it was empty of righteous things. Dem ich wol zu sprach Whomever I spoke to ich neuerliez iz nie durch daz I never left alone ich neriete ime an sine guot until I had drawn him away from his goodness. mit den gedanchen ich in sluch I battered him with my thoughts, ich honde in mit der zungen I screamed at him with my tongue, ich nesprach mit deme munde I spoke with my mouth nie war huoh unde spot nothing but spite and mockery. so ich scolde sprechen din lop When I should have spoken in praise of you so was ich unmuozech I was distracted. daz hastu wol gebuozet You have certainly wiped out that sin – des sag ich dir gande I can say that to you, merciful one! zechirchen ich trage I [was] reluctant at church, gerne ich roupte unde stal I liked to rob and steal, daz unreht ich uerhal I said unrighteous things mere dan ich solde more than I should. neheine maze ich newolde I did not want to be at all moderate mit huore began in my dealings with whores,  dem manne ich sine konen nam I took women from their husbands, michel unreht ich begie I committed many bad deeds. nechein wip ich nelie I left no woman alone ich si mit ir geuallen until I had fallen into sin with her, mit werchen ode mit willen in deeds or desires, ode mit so getanen ge | baren or in acts that die hurlich waren were worthy of whores. da mich auer iehtes umbe was But since it was not only about me,This line is unclear and probably corrupted. vil sciere urvmet ich daz I frequently brought it about daz ich alzoges guot wip that a completely good woman zeleibe brahte ir lip brought suffering upon herself mit unrehten mannen with unrighteous men – des han ich uil begangen I committed this sin frequently. ich hab mit meineiden I have, through perjury, getan so uil zeleide done so much harm miner armen sele to my poor soul. ich phlac des ie herre I always put much effort, Lord, daz ich ein rechere was into being vengeful. der mir iht getet oder gesprach Whoever did or spoke something against me – ich rach halt andere luote dinch I took revenge on those people. an dinen werchen was ich blint I was blind to your works, tore unde stumme deaf and dumb. owi wi wol ich daz chunde Alas, how easy it was for me mit ubele gewinnen to gain profit with wickedness! div heilige minne Sacred love diu was mir ie uerre was far away from me, nu hete ich sie gerne but now I would like it dearly. nu hore ich wol sagen So listen to me say this! swelh man ir nine habe Even if a man had nothing, er uerliese allez daz gut I would cause him to lose all the wealth daz er iemer geduot he had ever obtained. des sorge ich mir harte I am very sorry for this. necheineme ewarten To no priest chom ich niht ze behte did I ever go to confess nie so lutterlichen as audibly and clearly so ich uon rehte solde as I should have done. swenne ich auer denne wolde And when, after confession, die maz iemer iht began I was supposed to show moderation wande mir gnist dar ane scolde stan because my salvation depended upon it, des ich denne da gehiez that which I had promised des negeleiste ich niht I failed to do. Swenne ich solde uasten Whenever I was supposed to fast, so scalt ich den phaphen I cursed the priest der mir die buoze gebot who had given me this penance. zenihte uorhte ich den tot I never feared death; ich wande iemer solde leben I thought I would live for ever. ich han uil diche einem anderen gegeben I often passed onto others deiz mir leit wære things that caused me trouble, swer mir iz gebe regardless who had asked me to do these things. swenne ich herre ie genam Whenever, Lord, I ever dinen heren lichnamen received your holy body,I.e. during the Eucharist den behielt ich unrehte I treated it unjustly –  daz uergip du mir drehtin Lord, forgive me for this. swie herre daz zit was However sacred a day it was, ich neuerliez iz nie durch daz I never paid attention ich inbegienge minnen willen and continued to do as I wished, uber lut unde stille loudly and in silence – so han ich diche uermanet in this way I often held you in contempt. swa ich auer iemannen uant But whenever I found someone der ein irrære was who had been led astray, der geuiel mir aldestebaz he pleased me all the more. den chos ich mir zegesellen I chose him as my companion. nu mohte ich iemer zellen I have to say daz ich iz doh niemer uol zalte that I will never be able to list entirely da mit ich mich ualte those things through which I caused myself to fall. Des ich dir nu ueriehen han All those things that I have just said to you, unde alles des des ich han getan and everything that I have done, mit worten ode mit willen in words or deeds, mit deheiner slahte dinge or with any kind of thing – daz uergip du mir herre forgive me these things, Lord, durch drabes ere through the honour of the grave da du lage inne in which you lay, unde durch dines heiligen crucis willen and in the name of your holy cross, da du ane neme den tot on which you died durch aller sundære not for the suffering of sinners. du rihtiz uber min fleisch Judge my flesh,  daz der min arme geist so that my poor spirit iht uerlorn werde is not lost! is not lost! I was a weak piece of earth unde bin hiute so bose and am today so wicked, sod solt ich mich irlosen that I must set myself free dir herre gehuldigen and turn to you, Lord, aller miner sculde whom, in my sin, ich uil harte uersumet ware I have neglected so much. dem leidigen wizenære To the dreadful tormentor dem wurde sin gehalten ze uile I have cleaved too greatly! ein teil ich is nu uil  For some of this wrongdoing gerne hie gebuozzen I would now gladly like to do penance. daz ich daz getun muoze Holy Christ, grant it to me daz gip du mir heiliger crist that I might do this! du da scephære bist You, who are creator uber himel und unde uber erde of heaven and earth, nu hilf mir daz ich dir noch rehter werde help me become more righteous uor minem ende before my end. des bit ich dich durch dei gebende I pray for this in the name of the binding ties die du doltest uon den iuden you suffered at the hands of the Jews. nu ruche herre mich ze uridennen Lord, grant me peace Uor dem ubelen hunde from the wicked dogThis and further references to the ‘dog’ refer to the devil. der ie zallen stunden who, at all times, wiruet mit flize is assiduous in his attempts daz er mich beswiche to deceive me. er was des leider ane mir gewis He was, alas, certain of me des auer obe got wil nie nist (although, if God wills it, it will never happen), daz er mich in der hant hete certain he had me in his hands. er scol die selben mite That same torment die er mir da wolde geben that he wished to give me in hell –  uil lange ein ubele leben he should live with it for a long time in that evil place.This line doesn’t quite make sense. Waag/Schröder and Maurer render it as vil lange im ubele haben (which [i.e. the torment] I would have in evil circumstances for a very long time). daz ich ir hie uerdienet habe The part of this torment that I have deserved in this world – di nim du mir hie abe release me from it mit ettelichen dingen with various means, daz ich si nine bringe so that I bring none of it an den urteilichen tach to the day of judgement, da niemen nemach when no-one is able sin unreht bescirmen to hide their wrongdoing. da muzen si gehirmen Those people should desist, die hie ir antsage who, in this world, mit ir spehlichen rede in artful speeches da uure bietent make their excuses. ob in ieman riete If anyone advises them on ir sele gnist how to save their souls, des tages iz alzoges ist then at that moment it completely chomen uz allerslahte rate fails to be advice of any kind! so suftent si alze spate Then they sigh only too late. Nuo erchenne ich sundiger chnet I, sinful man, acknowledge uil wol min unrehte full well my wrongdoing, unde alle mine sculde and all my guilt. herre dine hulde Lord, your love han ich harte uerlorn I have lost completely, wol garnet dinen zorn and have certainly earned your anger. du uil heiliger crist Most holy Christ, nu weiz ich uil wol daz du bist I know full well that you are hiute also gnedich, so do just as merciful today, as you were do du deme scachære when you forgave the robber sine meintæte uerlieze for his wrongdoings unde du ime uil wol geheize and granted him life. nuo wil ich owch wider sinen I, too, wish to turn back, uil gerne gewinnen and win dearly, herre dine hulde Lord, your love, unde wil mich hiute sculdigen and wish to give myself, guilty man, in dine gnade geben to your grace, unde wil dir rihten unze ich lebe and to turn to you for as long as I live. nvo ist ouch billich unde reht So it is both good and right daz duo enphahest dinen armen chouf chnet that you should receive your poor servant! Herre uber elliu dinch Lord of all things, dir da wol muoglich sint you are easily able mine sculde zeuergebenne to forgive my sins. nuo | uerlich mir zelebenne Grant me life, unze ich uerworuener scalh so that I, cursed criminal, uon des tiuueles gewalt might from the devil’s power unphure mine sele set my soul free! des bitte ich dich herre I beg you this, Lord, durch willen der eren in the name of the honour diner heren uferte of your glorious ascension. nuo gedenche ane mir der worte Think, in my case, about the words der du spreche dinen iungeren zu that you spoke to your apostles. ane dine helue nemohte niemen niht getun Without your help no-one is able to do anything – daz ist herre uil war this, Lord, is very true! Maria diu newære nie so manich iar Mary would not have lived for so many years inder wuosten gewesen in the desert, der tiere spise genese sustained by the food of animals, ane dine guote without your goodness.The poet here refers to Mary of Egypt, a prostitute who retreats from her sins into the desert and eventually becomes a saint. diu hat mir min gemuote My heart was made gemachet uil ringe light and happy so getaner dinge by such things di uns uon ir sint gescriben that are written about her for us. den du herre wil beuriden Whoever you want to protect, Lord, der ist behalden unde irneren is cared for and kept healthy. ia ist uns ir daz geleren Indeed, we can learn from her, daz si sich so uerre uerworht hete who was so damned daz si der luft inlieze that the air did not allow her to enter zu ierusalem in daz muonster niht the temple in Jerusalem unzen riuwen gihiez until she committed to repent, zu buzeene ir sculde and to do penance for her sins. do gewan si dine hulden Then she won your love, din gnade ir sa den wech insloz and your mercy enclosed her in its path. da zestete si gnoz And then she rejoiced constantly, du uil heiliger crist most holy Christ, daz du so guot bist that you are so good. ouch wart si selbe so guot She herself also became so good bist daz si der luft enbore druoc that the air lifted her up, der ir daz munster e benam which had once kept her from the temple. swen ich sundiger man Whenever I, a sinful man, denche an dine gnade think of your grace, so bin ich uro zeware then I am truly happy so ist mir min gemuote uil ringe and my heart becomes light with joy. so getaner dinge Such things begienge duo diche uil you have often performed – ich engetar noch newil I neither dare nor desire missetruwen diner guote to mistrust your goodness. der ofen der da gluote The oven that glowed den chuldestu den chinden you made cool for the children, daz in dar inne so that inside it div hizze nine war there was no heat.The story of the youths in the fiery furnace is found in the Book of Daniel. Three young men refuse to worship the image of Nebuchadnezzar and are thrown into a furnace, but are protected by God from the flames dinen engel sandest du dar You sent your angel to that place daz er da mit samet in sanch to sing your praise with them, din lop warre heilant O true saviour. Swer sich ie zuo dir geuie Whoever has ever reached out for you, den uerlieze du nie you have never abandoned – daz ist offen unde war this is apparent and true! daz bewarst du wold dar You cared well for ander guoter susannen good Susanna.The story of Susanna is also found in the Book of Daniel. Susanna is falsely accused of adultery by two older men with whom she refuses to sleep; Daniel recognises her innocence. diu was mit noten beuagen She was trapped with torment, ir wart erteilet der tot she was condemned to death, unze din gnade do gebot until your grace commanded eime kindiscem manne a child-like man daz er ir half danne to help her from that situation an allen ir scaden she was in through no fault of her own. di si wolden ulorn han Those who wanted to condemn her mit luggeme urchunde  through their false testimony – uber di do urumedest you gave them die selben urteile the same judgement di si ir zeleide that they, to make her suffer, heten geraten had given her. wande siz alle taten For they had all acted an alle ir sulde without any guilt on her part. des uluren si dine hulde For this they lost your love. Gnediger herre Merciful Lord, du lostest danyelen you set Daniel free, der den lewen was gegeben who had been thrown to the lions,  di uil lange waren hungerige gelegen which had been lying, hungry, for a very long time in einem loche in a pit, daz si in zebrochen such that they should have scolden haben sciere quickly torn him to pieces.The Book of Daniel tells how Daniel is thrown into the lions’ den by Darius, King of Babylon, but miraculously saved by God. do gebud duo den tieren You commanded the animals daz si sin nine ruorten not to touch him. iene si gar zeuuorten They tore to pieces the people di in da dar uuorten who had put him there. nu entlip minen sunden Now spare my soul durch din selbes guote through your own goodness an dem wege der warheite and set it on the path of truth. nuo gip mir geleite Show me the way heim zuo minem erbe home to my inheritance – daz wil mir tieuel wergen the devil wants to keep me from it in his stranglehold. Du nech aller keisere King of Kings, uater aller weisen father of all the wise, uoget aller armen protector of all the poor, nuo la mich dir erbarmen have mercy upon me, daz mir min erbe for the devil wants to keep me from my inheritance der tieuel wil wergen in his stranglehold. daz sol auer ich ein kanpf mit ime uehten But if I must fight a battle with him, des hilf du mir threhtin Lord, then help me, daz ich armer an im gesige a poor man, have victory over him! owi gerne ich in uon mir uertribe Oh, how gladly I would drive him from me, daz er mit mir nehete nechein geuerte would that he had never had anything to do with me! sin lon ist herte His reward is a hard one – ich hore wol sagen indeed, I have heard it said daz er niht nehabe that he has nothing niemanne zegebenne to give to anyone wane bech unde swebel except fire and brimstone, diu zwei wallen unde brinnen which both seethe and burn, der werde niemer ende and of which there will be no end uon ewen unze in ewen for ever and ever. so getane wewen Such pains giebt er zemite he gives as torment. mir wære lieber daz erz ime hete I would rather that he kept them to himself. Ich wil ime uil gerne entinnen I would dearly like to escape him einen bezzeren lon gewinnen and gain a better reward umbe minen scephare from my creator. wi durft mir nuo ware Oh, what need I have now daz ich hete ein brust sloz for a breastplate uur sin ureislic scoz from his sharp arrows, uur sine scerphen strale from his sharp arrows, da mit er an twale which, unhesitatingly, uil diche ramet min he aims at me regularly! diu brustwere darf auer niht sin But the breastplate must not be weder horn noch bein horn or bone, noch stal noch stein or steel or stone –  da wurde ich under irslagen I would be killed beneath it. rehten glouben sol ich haben I must have correct belief unde die ware riuwe and true contrition, unde die guoten triuwe and good loyalty, den stetigen gedingen constant hope, unde die cristenliche minne and Christian love, dult unde demuot patience and humility: die geweffene wæren uil guot these weapons would be good uuor den hunt uerwazen in the face of the damned dog. so muos mir die straze  Then he would have to turn his arrow rumen zagelichen away from me, like a coward, unde al | lenthalben intwichen and go away entirely. Duo sogetane chamf wat Such armour herre niemen nehat no-one has, Lord, wane dem du sie geben wil unless you give it to them. nuo wære rehte daz wir dich vil So it would be right for us in nerchlichen beten to pray to you, frequently and inwardly, umbe alle die ir nine heten for all those people who do not have it, heten so ich sundiger nhean like I do not, a sinful man. swenne ich ettewenne stan Whenever I stand anywhere unde uil gerne bete dich and pray to you, very keenly, niemer nemag ich I am never able uf guon minen munt to open my mouth, so der uerwazene hunt without the cursed dog newaiz wanne zuo uert knowing where to go. der allez guot derne wert He, who likes to cleave to wealth, hat mir ettewaz guot braht gave me some of it  da er mir die guoten andaht and, with it, in haste, sciere mit hat entragen took my good devotion, die ich zu dir scolde haben which I should have directed to you. daz chlage ich diner guote I bewail this to your goodness: dv newellest mich behuoten if you do not wish to protect me er bringet mich in not then he will bring me into trouble. durch dinen heiligen tot In the name of your holy death gedench waz daz ware think what would happen da duo mich sundere if you were to send me, a sinner, uz werden hieze away! la mich des geniezen Therefore let me survive! daz uil wol west daz You know full well daz iz newederez was that it was neither of those, weder isen noch bein neither iron nor bone: iz was ein broder leim it was weak clay da du mich [] uester machenThis should clearly be a couplet. There is no gap in the MS; either the scribe has miscopied the source or there was an error in the source. from which you [made me]. [You did not want to [?]] make me stronger. ich nehan necheine craft I have no power wider die mich herehaft with which to fight ane uehtentent, tægelichen those who come against me, armed, every day, und mich des ewigen riches and would gladly expel me uil gerne bestieze from the eternal kingdom, ob sie diu gotheitAs above. if they could […]. Your godhead uon himele her in erde treip bore you from heaven here to earth in einer armen magede buoch into the womb of a poor maid, zu diu daz du hvlfest uf so that you could help those dem der da geuallen was on earth, who had fallen. daz du herre ie daz That thing that you, Lord, durch unsich getete once did for our sake – daz riet dir din guote your goodness advised you to do it, unde uil uerre din gnade and also your grace, wande wir des unwirdich waren for we were unworthy of it. Wie mohte wir daz uerdienet haben How could we have deserved it daz du dich lieze anslahen that you let yourself be beaten, spoten unde spiwen mocked and spat upon, daz du dich lieze triben that you let yourself be driven an die stat da man dich hie to the place where you were under die da waren ie counted amongst those who were also there, zu den scacheren gezalt amongst the robbers? owi din gotlich gewalt Oh, what godly power you have! do wolt er sich nider neigen Then he wished to bow his head daz er des tages so that, at that moment,Christ has previously be addressed in the second person; here the address changes to the third person (before changing back again in l. 828). deste minner nine was he was not diminished. die helle erunder diu brach He broke into hell down below. do du in dem tode, himel unde erde When you, in death, set all of heaven and earth allez erweget werden into motion, steine di zebrasten dar abe the stones of hell burst asunder. genuo | ge erstunden an dem tage Many rose up on that day die uor manegen iaren who, for many years,  gar eruulet waren had been rotting. sich zaten diu uber elliu diu lant They spread out over all the land. Sich uerwandelote daz lieht The light was transformed! der tivuel der newesse niht The devil did not know waz er in der mennscheit was who he was,I.e. Christ. clothed as a man, di er da uzen ane sach whom he saw there outside of hell – diu gotheit was inuerholn his godhead was hidden from him. daz er da hete uerstolen Those who he stole away im was sin sterchorre chomen joined his chorus of stars. daz ime ouch alle die benomen werden Let those people be kept from the devil die uffe dirre erden who, on earth, sin gebildet nach dire follow your example – daz gib in unde ouch mire grant this to them and also to me! du uil heilige gotes sun You most holy son of God, Qui uiuis &amp; regnas per omnia secula seculorum. qui vivis et regnas per omnia secula seculorum.‘Who live and reign for ever and ever.’                             
 
## Introduction to the Source 
<p>Vorau, Stiftsbibliothek Cod. 276 is a major anthology of ‘Early Middle High German’ verse texts. The Vorau manuscript was made in the last quarter of the twelfth century in the southern German lands, probably in Vorau itself: an abbey of Augustinian canons in the Steiermark, in the far east of what is now Austria. It has been suggested that the manuscript was made in the monastic-aristocratic nexus formed by the monastery and the family of its founder, Margrave Ottakar III, and although there is no concrete evidence for this thesis it seems plausible. Measuring 450 x 325cm, the Vorau manuscript is a substantial, high-quality object consisting of two fascicles (or independent ‘booklets’), one German and one Latin. The German fascicle begins with the earliest extant witness of the <em>Kaiserchronik (Chronicle of Emperors)</em>, followed by the <em>Vorau Books of Moses</em> and twelve shorter German verse works on primarily biblical and religious themes. Setting aside the <em>Kaiserchronik</em>, the manuscript is constructed along a loosely chronological path from the creation of the world to the Last Judgement, with the texts following a path from the Old Testament to Alexander the Great, finishing with the New Testament and the end of the world. The <em>Vorau Plaint of Sin</em> is positioned between the works of Frau Ava and the<em> Song of Ezzo</em>, which also deal with the life of Christ and the fate of mankind. It is unclear when the German fascicle was first bound together with the Latin fascicle, which contains Otto of Freising’s chronicle of the house of Hohenstaufen, the<em> Gesta Friderici imperatoris</em>.</p>
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>The <em>Vorau Plaint of Sin</em>, written in the second half of the twelfth century in the south-eastern German lands, is a substantial poem addressed to God in the voice of a sinner. The poem is conventionally counted as part of a small sub-genre of Early Middle High German religious poetry known as the ‘Sündenklage’, or ‘plaint of sin’. These poems – there is also the <em>Millstatt Plaint of Sin</em>, the closely related <em>Rheinau Paul</em> and the more simplistic <em>Uppsala Plaint of Sin</em> – all have at their heart a confession of sinfulness and a prayer to God for mercy, and are thought to have taken their inspiration from the more practical text-type of the German confession (‘Beichte’). These confessions, generalized first-person confessions in prose, are transmitted widely from the ninth century and had a variety of liturgical and devotional functions.</p> <p>Yet the <em>Vorau Plaint of Sin</em> is not simply a confession of sin, but rather a relatively complex meditation on human sinfulness and atonement more broadly. At its heart is an attempt to make sense of sin through an emphasis on its integral role in the dynamic system of redemption and salvation. The poem stresses the unavoidability of the fact of sin: the sins of man are a necessary prerequisite for the redemptive role of Christ. Yet this does not mean that the sinner should not feel contrition for what he has done, and the poem is rich with tension between an insistence on the contrition and weakness of the self on the one hand and his metaphysical self-confidence and self-awareness on the other. The result is a poem that will be rewarding to readers interested in attitudes towards sinfulness, and how sinfulness intersects with humanity, metaphysics and devotion.</p> <p>The <em>Vorau Plaint of Sin</em> is found in two manuscripts. It is transmitted in complete form in a substantial, multi-text codex (Vorau, Stiftsbibliothek Cod. 276 (see below)) and in partial form in Zwettl, Stiftsbibliothek Cod. 73, a twelfth-century Hrabanus Maurus manuscript.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Bowden, Sarah, ‘Vorauer Sammlung und Zwettler Federproben: Die <em>Vorauer Sündenklage</em> in der literarischen Sammelpraxis des 12. Jahrhunderts’, in <em>Sammeln als literarische Praxis im Mittelalter und in der frühen Neuzeit</em>, ed. by Mark Chinca, Manfred Eikelmann, Michael Stolz and Christopher Young. Narr, forthcoming 2021.</p> <ul> <li>On the transmission of the <em>Vorau Plaint of Sin</em>.</li> </ul> <p>Haug, Walter, ‘Literature, allegory and salvation: theoretical positions in Early Middle High German’, in Haug, <em>Vernacular Literary Theory in the Middle Ages</em>, trans. by Joanna M. Catling, Cambridge Studies in Medieval Literature, 29. Cambridge UP, 1997, pp. 46–74.</p> <ul> <li>A introduction to the content and style of German religious poetry of the twelfth century, focusing on salvation and praise.</li> </ul> <p>Schafferhoher, Gernot, and Martin Schubert, ‘Vorau’, in <em>Schreiborte des deutschen Mittelalters. Skriptorien – Werke – Mäzene</em>, edited by Martin Schubert. de Gruyter, 2013, pp. 513–35.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive introduction to the Vorau codex, with references to the extensive scholarship on this manuscript.</li> </ul> <p><a href="https://doi.org/10.11588/edition.kcd"><em>Kaiserchronik digital, Elektronische Ausgabe</em>, edited by Mark Chinca, Helen Hunter, Jürgen Wolf, Christopher Young. Heidelberg Universitätsbibliothek, 2018.</a></p> <ul> <li>Online edition of all redactions of the <em>Kaiserchronik</em>, including a full digitization of the Vorau codex.</li> </ul>
## Credits
Transcription by Sarah Bowden, Translation by Sarah Bowden, Introduction by Sarah Bowden, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Salma Kamni
