---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: |
  To the tune “Picking Mulberries”—“Since we parted, I often recall the time in the western building” | 採桑子 · 別來長憶西樓事
engtitle: |
  To the tune “Picking Mulberries”—“Since we parted, I often recall the time in the western building”
origtitle: |
  採桑子 · 別來長憶西樓事
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/yan_jidao_since_we_parted"
redirect_from: /text/tune-%E2%80%9Cpicking-mulberries%E2%80%9D%E2%80%94%E2%80%9C-we-parted-i-often-recall-time-western-building%E2%80%9D
identifier: yan_jidao_since_we_parted.md
tei: /assets/tei/yan_jidao_since_we_parted.xml
pdf: /assets/pdf/yan_jidao_since_we_parted.pdf
textauthor: Yan Jidao 晏幾道
languages: [chinese]
periods: [11th_century]
textcollections: [love-lust-longing, love-songs]
sdr: https://purl.stanford.edu/druid 
image: /assets/img/text/yan_jidao_since_we_parted.jpg
thumb: /assets/img/text/yan_jidao_since_we_parted-thumb.jpg
imagesource: ""
fulltext: ""
---
 Detail from 宋人畫南唐耿先生煉雪圖軸 (building)", Anonymous, National Palace Museum, Accession Number: K2A000172N000000000PAA [Public Domain]

 採桑子 To the tune “Picking Mulberries” 別來長憶西樓事， Since we parted, I often recall the time in the western buildingSee Introduction for a discussion of the image of the “western building” (西樓). 結遍蘭襟。 when we tied orchids to each other’s lapels.Tying orchids to each other’s lapel is a token of love and intimacy. 遺恨重尋。 Searching the past, I end up with regrets; 弦斷相如綠綺琴。 the strings of Sima Xiangru’s Green Brocade are snapped.Sima Xiangru 司馬相如 (179 BCE – 117 BCE), an outstanding rhapsody writer and zither player, was also known for the ideal love between him and his wife, who had great literary talent as well. "The Green Brocade" was the name of Sima Xiangru’s famous zither which he played to court her. The snapped strings of the zither imply that the intimate bond has been broken. 何時一枕逍遙夜， When will we be able to share the pillow again and have a night of joy, 細話初心。 to talk in detail about our feelings like when we were first together? 若問如今。 If she asks me about my feelings towards her now, 也似當時著意深。 I will tell her that my love is as deep as it was then. 
 
## Introduction to the Text 
<p>In this <em>ci</em>, a male speaker expresses his regret over a lost love. An interesting image here is “the western building” (西樓). According to <em>I Ching</em> (<em>周易</em>), an ancient Chinese divination text, the direction west is associated with the element "metal", which was considered to be the dominant element in autumn. Autumn is usually associated with separation and loneliness, so the image of the western building is often used by poets as a symbol for such feelings. I Ching also states that the direction west is feminine, "yin" (阴). As a consequence, "the western building" often refers to the private room of women in a household. The western building is a recurring image in ci poetry and appears in several of the texts in this collection.</p> <p>The <em>ci</em> genre of Chinese poetry first emerged in the Sui dynasty (581-619), was further developed in the Tang dynasty (618-907) and matured in the Northern Song dynasty (960-1127). <em>Ci</em> is usually translated into English as "song lyrics". This is because <em>ci</em> were composed by poets to fit pre-existing tunes. The number of lines, the line lengths, and the tonal and rhythmic patterns of <em>ci</em> vary with the tunes, which number in the hundreds. One common occasion for composing <em>ci</em> would be a banquet: song lyrics would be scribbled down by guests and then sung by musical performers as entertainment. Other occasions for composing and enjoying <em>ci</em> would be more casual: the poet might sing the lyrics to himself at home or while travelling (many <em>ci</em> poets were civil servants of the Imperial Court and often had to travel great distances to carry out their work). Sometimes the lyrics would be sung by ordinary people in the same way as folk songs. This oral and musical quality sets it apart from other genres of poetry in China during the same period, which were largely written texts with more elevated objectives. There are two main types of <em>ci</em>: <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") and <em>háofàng</em> (豪放, "bold"). The <em>wǎnyuē</em> subgenre primarily focuses on emotion and many of its lyrics are about courtship and love, while the<em> háofàng</em> subgenre often deals with themes that were considered more profound by contemporary audiences, such as ageing and mortality, or the rewards and disappointments of public service.</p> <p><meta charset="utf-8" /></p> <p dir="ltr">Yan Jidao 晏幾道 was the son of the eminent ci poet Yan Shu 晏殊. Together, Yan Jidao and Yan Shu are often referred to as “double Yan”, with Yan Jidao being the “Little Yan 小晏” and Yan Shu being the “Big Yan 大晏”, reflecting the fact that during their lifetimes they were both the iconic poets of the <em>wǎnyuē</em> (婉约, "graceful") subgenre of ci. Unlike his father, who held a prestigious state position alongside a blooming poetry career, Yan Jidao led a far more arduous life. As the seventh son of Yan Shu, he was born into a noble and wealthy family, and had little interest in officialdom at a young age. His lifestyle was extravagant, filled with luxurious banquets, joyous travels with friends, and beautiful courtesans.</p> <p dir="ltr">After Yan Shu passed away in Yan Jidao's late teens, the young man realized the imminent financial difficulties which would befall him and abandoned his previously extravagant lifestyle, devoting himself to a political career. However, he struggled to replicate his father's success and was framed for his involvement in the movement against Wang Anshi’s New Policies (a series of government reforms), which led to him being jailed. Even though he was quickly released, this incident did huge damage to both his political career and his finances. In his later years, he returned to writing ci, and started compiling a collection of his own works, called <em>Little Mountain Ci</em> (<em>小山词</em>) . In the prologue to this collection, he wrote: “I now think of the ones who once drank with me. Some of them have passed away; others fell prey to illness. I read through my collection as if reliving my past sadnesses, joys, separations and gatherings, which now are like fantasies, or a sudden lighting strike, or a faded dream. Thus I could only cover my pages and mourn, for time slips away too fast, and past joys are illusory and unreal.”</p> <p dir="ltr">As a poet of the <em>wǎnyuē </em>subgenre, Yan Jidao’s lyrics pay great attention to romantic affairs with courtesans. Compared to his contemporaries, Yan Jidao focuses more on the existential and emotional aspect rather than the physical aspect of these affairs, and incorporates more introspection into his poems. Because of the occurrence of specific names and locations in his ci, some of his ci invite a biographical reading. However, as ci are song lyrics intended for multiple performances by different singers on different occasions, there is also a universal character to the sentiments evoked in Yan Jidao’s ci which transcends the poet’s personal experiences.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Chang, Kang-i Sun. <em>The Evolution of Tz’u Poetry: from Late Tang to Northern Sung</em>. Princeton UP, 1980.</p> <ul> <li>A standard survey of the early history of Chinese song lyrics (romanized as both ci and tz’u).</li> </ul> <p>Egan, Ronald. “The Song Lyric.” <em>The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature</em>, vol. 1, edited by Stephen Owen, Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 434-452.</p> <ul> <li>An overview of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Owen, Stephen. <em>Just a Song: Chinese Lyrics from the Eleventh and Early Twelfth Centuries</em>. Asia Center, Harvard UP, 2019.</p> <ul> <li>A recent new history of the genre.</li> </ul> <p>Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋, editor. <em>Quan Song Ci 全宋詞</em>. Zhonghua shu ju, 1965. 5 vols.</p> <ul> <li>A comprehensive edition of ci from the Song dynasty and the source text for the ci in this collection (introductions and annotations are in Chinese).</li> </ul>
## Credits
Text based on Tang, Guizhang 唐圭璋 (ed.). Quan Song Ci 全宋詞. Vol 1. Beijing: Zhonghua shu ju, 1965, , Translation by Qian Jia, Notes by Dante Zhu, Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Dante Zhu
